The Project Gutenberg eBook of Glenarvon, Volume 1 (of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Glenarvon, Volume 1 (of 3)

Author: Lady Caroline Lamb

Release date: August 15, 2022 [eBook #68754]

Language: English

Credits: Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLENARVON, VOLUME 1 (OF 3) ***



Transcriber’s Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  The following are possible misspellings:
     benshees
     combated
     controul
     empassioned/impassioned
     encrease/increase
     Glenaa/Glanaa
     innoxtious
     Mounteagle/Monteagle
     Mowbrey/Mowbray
     overweaning/overweening
     pretentions
     Trelawny/Trelawney

   Chapter IX is missing in the numbering sequence.

   “beaten tract” should possibly be “beaten track”

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.




     GLENARVON.

     IN THREE VOLUMES.

     VOL. I.

     LONDON:
     PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN,
     1816.

     London: Printed by Schulze and Dean,
     13, Poland Street.




     Disperato dolor, che il cor mi preme
     Gía pur pensando, pria che ne favelle.




CHAPTER I.


In the town of Belfont, in Ireland, lived a learned physician of the
name of Everard St. Clare. He had a brother, who, misled by a fine
but wild imagination, which raised him too far above the interests of
common life, had squandered away his small inheritance; and had long
roved through the world, rapt in poetic visions, foretelling, as he
pretended, to those who would hear him, that which futurity would more
fully develop.—Camioli was the name he had assumed.

It was many years since Sir Everard last beheld his brother, when one
night Camioli, bearing in his arms Elinor his child, about five years of
age, returned, after his long absence to his native town, and knocked
at Sir Everard’s door. The doctor was at the castle hard by, and his
lady refused admittance to the mean-looking stranger. Without informing
her of his name, Camioli departed, and resolved to seek his sister the
Abbess of Glenaa. The way to the convent was long and dreary: he climbed,
therefore, with his lovely burthen to the topmost heights of Inis Tara,
and sought temporary shelter in a cleft of the mountain known by the
name of the “Wizzard’s Glen.” Bright shone the stars that night, and
to the exalted imagination of the aged seer, it seemed in sleep, that
the spirits of departed heroes and countrymen, freed from the bonds of
mortality, were ascending in solemn grandeur before his eyes;—the song of
the Banshees, mourning for the sorrows of their country, broke upon the
silence of night;—a lambent flame distinguished the souls of heroes, and,
pointing upwards, formed a path of light before them;—the air resounded
with the quivering of wings, as with one accord innumerable spirits
arose, fanning the breeze with their extended plumes, and ascending like
a flight of birds toward the heavens.

Then, for the first time, Camioli beheld, in one comprehensive view, the
universal plan of nature—unnumbered systems performing their various but
distinct courses, unclouded by mists, and unbounded by horizon—endless
variety in infinite space! Then first he seemed to hear the full
harmonious cadences of the angelic choirs—celestial music, uttered by
happy spirits in praise of the great Author of Existence, as directing
their flight onwards from sphere to sphere, from world to world, they
felt joyful in themselves, and rejoiced in the wonders and variety of
creation.

From visions so wild, yet delightful, the soft sweet voice of his child
awoke him.—“How cold and dreary it is, dear father; how lone these
hills. I am weary unto death, yet I fear to sleep.”—“My comforter, my
delight, my little black-eyed darling,” said Camioli (enveloping his
child in his long dark mantle), “why do I thus sully the purity of
your nature by leading you to the abode of misery, and shewing you the
haunts of men! They are but as the flowers that blossom and wither, or
as the clouds that pass along to shade for a moment the brightness of
the heavens:—all here on earth is desolation and woe. But I will soon
take you, my lovely one, to a place of safety. My sister, the Abbess of
Glenaa, lives in the valley beneath the mountain: she will protect my
Elinor; and, in her mansion, my child shall find an asylum. I shall leave
you but for a short time; we shall meet again, Elinor;—yes, we shall meet
again.—Continue to live with St. Clara your aunt: obey her in all things,
for she is good: and may the God of Mercy avert from you the heaviest
of all my calamities, the power of looking into futurity.”—He spoke,
and descending the rugged mountain path, placed his Elinor according to
promise, under the protection of his sister the Abbess of Glenaa, and
bidding her farewell, walked hastily away.

The morning sun, when it arose, shone bright and brilliant upon the
valley of Altamonte—its gay castle, and its lake. But a threatening
cloud obscured the sky, as Camioli raised his eyes and turned them
mournfully upon the ruined priory of St. Alvin, and the deserted halls
of Belfont.—“Woe to the house of Glenarvon!” he said. “Woe to the house
of my patron and benefactor! Desolation and sorrow have fallen upon
the mighty. Mourn for the hero who is slain in battle. Mourn for the
orphan who is left destitute and in trouble.... Bright shone the sun
upon thy battlements, O Belfont, on the morn when the hero bade thee a
last adieu. Cold are thy waters, Killarney; and many a tree has been
hewn from thy rocky bosom, thou fair mountain Glenaa, since the hour
in which he parted. But not so cold, nor so barren is thy bosom, as is
that of the widow who is bereft of every joy.... Mourn for the house
of Glenarvon, and the orphan who is destitute! No mother—no companion
of boyish sports and pleasures yet lives to greet him with one cheering
smile.—There is not left one tongue to welcome him to his native land;
or, should he fall, one friend to shed a tear upon his grave!”

Thus sung the Bard, while the red deer were browsing upon the hills,
and the wind whistled through the arches and colonades of the Castle of
Belfont, as if in hollow murmurs for times which were long past.—“Woe
to the house of our patron,” said the frenzied old man, as with bitter
tears he departed:—“even in this moment of time, the fairest star of
Belfont sets for ever: the widowed Countess of Glenarvon is dead—dead
in a foreign country; and strangers hands alone perform her obsequies.”
He spoke, and looked, for the last time, upon the land that he loved,
then turned from it for ever.... Previous, however, to his departure
from Ireland, Camioli again sought his brother, (who was then an inmate
in the family of the Duke of Altamonte,) for the purpose of commending
Elinor to his care.

Castle Delaval, the property of that nobleman, was situated in a valley
sheltered from every keen blast by a dark wood of fir and elm. The
river Elle, taking its rise amidst the Dartland Hills, flowed through
the park, losing by degrees the character of a mountain torrent, as it
spread itself between its rich and varied banks in front of the castle,
till it joined the sea beyond the Wizzard’s Glen. The town of Belfont
stands close upon the harbour, and from one of the highest cliffs, the
ruins of the convent of St. Mary, and a modern chapel may yet be seen,
whilst Heremon and Inis Tara, raising their lofty summits, capped with
snow, soar above the clouds.

The abbey of Belfont, and the priory of St. Alvin, both the property
of the Glenarvon family, were now, in consequence of the forfeiture of
the late Earl of that name, transferred to Lord de Ruthven, a distant
relation. The deserted priory had fallen into ruin, and Belfont abbey,
as yet unclaimed by its youthful master, and pillaged by the griping
hand of its present owner, exhibited a melancholy picture of neglect and
oppression.—No cheerful fires blaze in its ancient halls; no peasants
and vassals feast under its vaulted roofs.—Glenarvon, the hero, the lord
of the demesne is dead:—he fell on the bloody field of Culloden:—his
son perished in exile:—and Clarence de Ruthven, his grandson, an orphan,
in a foreign land, has never yet appeared to petition for his attainted
titles and forfeited estates.—Of relations and of friends he has never
heard.

Where are they who claim kindred with the unfortunate? Where are they who
boast of friendship for the orphan that is destitute and in trouble? The
Duke of Altamonte, whose domains were contiguous, and whose attachment
extended to the son of his ancient friend, had ofttimes written to
his sister enquiring into the fate of the child; but Lady Margaret had
answered her brother’s letters with coldness and indifference.




CHAPTER II.


It is the common failing of an ambitious mind to over-rate itself—to
imagine that it has been, by the caprices of fortune, defrauded of
the high honours due to its supposed superiority. It conceives itself
to have been injured—to have fallen from its destination; and these
unfounded claims become the source of endless discontent. The mind, thus
disappointed, preys upon itself, and compares its present lowliness with
the imaginary heights for which it fancies itself to have been intended.
Under the influence of these reflections, the character grows sullen and
reserved, detaches itself from all social enjoyments, and professes to
despise the honours for which it secretly pines. Mediocrity, and a common
lot, a man of this disposition cannot bring himself to endure; and he
wilfully rejects the little granted, because all cannot be obtained, to
which he once aspired.

In this temper, the Duke of Altamonte had retired from public affairs,
and had quitted the splendour and gaiety of the court, to seek in
retirement that repose which, of all men, he was the least calculated to
appreciate or enjoy. In the society of the duchess, he found all that
could sooth his wounded spirit. In Mrs. Seymour, the duchess’s sister,
he welcomed a mild and unobtrusive guest; and the project of uniting the
Lady Calantha Delaval, his only daughter, to her cousin William Buchanan,
heir presumptive to the Dukedom of Altamonte, and son of his sister Lady
Margaret Buchanan, for some time occupied his hours and engrossed his
attention.

To forward this favourite object, he communicated to them both, that
they were destined for each other; and by employing them in the same
occupations, instructing them in the same studies, by the same masters,
and in every way contriving that they should be continually together he
hoped that early habits, and the first affections of childhood, might
unite their hearts in indissoluble bonds. But how short-sighted, how
little founded in a right knowledge of human nature, was this project!
Habituated to the intimacy which subsists between near relations, was
it probable that love, when the age of that passion arrived, would be
content with objects thus familiar; and that the feelings of the heart
would quietly acquiesce in an arrangement which had been previously formed
upon the calculations of interest and family pride?—On the contrary, the
system pursued in their education, accustomed them to give way to their
violent tempers, without restraint, in their intercourse with each other;
and the frequent recurrence of petty quarrels, soon produced sentiments,
which bordered on dislike; so that at the moment, when the Duke exulted
most in the success of his project, he was painfully undeceived.

Happily, a new event which occurred at this time in the family of the
Duke of Altamonte, soon turned his thoughts from the failure of his
present system of education, the superintendence of which he relinquished
with as much readiness, as he had once shewn anxiety to undertake
it.—The Duchess, after a long period of ill health, was pronounced by
her physicians to be once more in a situation to realize her husband’s
most sanguine hopes.—“If I have a boy,” he cried, “from the hour of his
birth all I possess shall be his. Give me but a son, ye powers who rule
over destiny, and I am content to yield up every other claim, privilege
and possession.”—The wish was heard, and at the appointed time, the
Duchess of Altamonte, after a few hours illness, was delivered of a son
and heir. It was in vain for the Duke, that until this event he said to
himself daily as he arose from his stately bed, that none other was his
rival in wealth or power;—it was in vain that friends surrounded him,
and flatterers attended upon his least commands:—until this unexpected,
and almost unhoped for event, he could not be said to have enjoyed
one hour of felicity, so unwisely did he blind himself to every other
blessing which he possessed; and so ardently solicitous did he suffer
his mind to become, for that one boon which alone had been refused to
his prayers. But since the birth of his son, he looked around him, and
he had nothing left to wish for upon earth; his heart became agitated
with its own satisfaction; and the terror of losing the idol upon which
every feeling and affection was fixed, rendered him more miserable than
he was even before the fulfilment of his wishes.

The education of the lady Calantha and William Buchanan was now entirely
laid aside; the feuds and tumults in the adjacent countries were
disregarded; and he might be said to live alone in those apartments
where, robed in state, and cradled in luxury, the little infant lay
helpless and unconscious of its honours and importance. Not a breath of
air was suffered to blow too rudely upon the most noble and illustrious
Sidney Albert, Marquis of Delaval. The tenants and peasantry flocked,
from far and near, to kneel and do him homage, gazing in stupid wonder on
their future Lord. The Duchess feebly resisted the general voice, which
encouraged an excess of care, hurtful to the health of him, whom all
were but too solicitous to preserve. Yet the boy flourished, unaffected
by this adulation, the endless theme of discussion, the constant object
of still increasing idolatry.

Without delay, the Duke resolved to intimate to his sister, Lady Margaret
Buchanan, who was at Naples, the change which had taken place in her
son’s expectations. He felt the necessity of softening the disappointment
by every soothing expression; and, as he loved her most sincerely he
wrote to urge her immediate return, with all the warmth of fraternal
affection;—informing her at the same time of the circumstance which
at once occasioned his delight, and her disappointment. With what fond
overweaning vanity did he then flatter himself, that she, who was the
next dearest object of his affections, would share his present joy; and
forgetful of the entire ruin of her fondest hope, doat like him upon the
child who had deprived her son of all his expectations! He knew not Lady
Margaret:—less than any other, he knew that fierce spirit which never
yet had been controuled—which deemed itself born to command, and would
have perished sooner than have endured restraint.

At this very period of time, in the prosecution of her sudden and accursed
designs, having bade adieu to brighter climes and more polished manners,
with all the gaiety of apparent innocence, and all the brilliancy of wit
which belong to spirits light as air and a refined and highly cultivated
genius, she was sailing, accompanied by a train of admirers, selected
from the flower of Italy, once again to visit her native country. With
their voices and soft guitars, they chased away the lingering hours;
and after a fair and prosperous voyage, proceeded, with their equipages,
horses and attendants, to Castle Delaval.

Lady Margaret was received with delight at the house of her father, in her
own native land. A burst of applause hailed her first appearance before
the wondering crowd assembled to behold her. Fond of admiration, even from
the lowest, she lingered on the terrace, which commanded the magnificent
scenery of which Castle Delaval was the central object,—leaning upon the
arm of the Duke and bowing gracefully to the people, as if in thanks for
their flattering reception. Buchanan alone met his mother without one
mark of joy. Cold and reserved, from earliest childhood, he had never yet
felt attachment for any other being than himself; and fully engrossed by
the splendour with which he was at all times surrounded, he looked with
indifference on every event which did not promote or prevent his own
personal amusements. He saw many new guests arrive without experiencing
the slightest accession of pleasure; and when those departed whom he
had been in the habit of seeing around him, it seldom cost him even a
momentary regret. He had so long and so frequently been informed that he
was heir of the immense possessions now belonging to his uncle, that he
was overpowered by the sense of his greatness; nor did the commiseration
of his attendants, on his disappointed hopes, awaken him to the conviction
of the great change which had occurred since the birth of the Marquis
of Delaval. Indeed he seemed as indifferent on this occasion as on all
others. Yet whatever his errors, he was at least in person and manner all
that Lady Margaret could wish. She was also much pleased with Calantha,
and thought she traced, in her radiant countenance, some resemblance to
her own.

The Duchess of Altamonte had, in mind and person, won the affections
of all who approached her. She had a countenance in which languor and
delicacy added sensibility and grace, to beauty,—an air of melancholy
half veiled in smiles of sweetness,—and a form soft and fragile as the
bright fictions of a poet’s dream; yet a visible sadness had fallen upon
her spirits, and whilst she appeared alone to sooth and bless every other
heart, she seemed herself in need of consolation. Lady Margaret’s beauty
irresistibly attracted; her wit enlivened; and her manners fascinated—but
the dreadful secrets of her heart appalled!

Lady Margaret was not much liked by Mrs. Seymour, nor by many other of
the guests who frequented the castle. Her foreign domestics, her splendid
attire, her crafty smiles and highly polished manners,—all were in turn
criticised and condemned. But neither prejudice nor vulgarity received
from her lips the slightest censure. She did not even appear to see the
ill will shewn to her. Yet many thought the discords and disasters which
occurred after her arrival in Ireland, were the fruits of her intriguing
spirit, and all soon or late regretted her presence at the castle, till
then, the seat of uninterrupted harmony and almost slumberous repose.




CHAPTER III.


Lady Margaret Delaval, only surviving sister of the Duke of Altamonte,
was born in Ireland, where she remained until her marriage with Captain
Buchanan. She then established herself at Naples; the fleet in which
her husband served being stationed in the Mediterranean sea. After the
birth of her son William, she immediately sent him to Ireland, there
to receive, under her brother’s tuition, an education more fitting the
heir of Altamonte, and the future husband of Lady Calantha Delaval.

Freed from the last tie which had bound her to one feeling of honour
or of virtue, she, without remorse, gave way during the absence of
her child and husband (who accompanied the boy to Ireland) to a life
of extravagance and vice, ensnaring the inexperienced by her art, and
fascinating the most wary by her beauty and her talents. The charms of
her person and the endowments of her mind were worthy of a better fate
than that which she was preparing for herself. But, under the semblance
of youthful gaiety, she concealed a dark intriguing spirit, which could
neither remain at rest, nor satisfy itself in the pursuit of great and
noble objects. She had been hurried on by the evil activity of her own
mind, until the habit of crime had overcome every scruple, and rendered
her insensible to repentance, and almost to remorse. In this career,
she had improved to such a degree her natural talent of dissimulation,
that, under its impenetrable veil, she was able to carry on securely her
darkest machinations; and her understanding had so adapted itself to her
passions, that it was in her power to give, in her own eyes, a character
of grandeur, to the vice and malignity, which afforded an inexplicable
delight to her depraved imagination.

While she was thus indulging her disgraceful inclinations, her heart
became attached with all her characteristic violence to Lord Dartford,
a young English nobleman, who had accompanied the Countess of Glenarvon
to Naples, and who, after passing some months in her society, had
already made her the offer of his hand. He no sooner, however, beheld
Lady Margaret than he left that object of his first attachment; and the
short-lived happiness of guilty passion was thus enhanced by a momentary
triumph over a beautiful and unfortunate rival.—Lady Glenarvon lived
not to lament it: the blow which was given by the hand she loved, went
straight as it was aimed; it pierced her heart; she did not long survive.

Her son, already advancing towards manhood, she committed to the care of
the Count Gondimar, the only being who, amongst the numerous attendants
in the hours of her prosperity, had remained with her in this last
trying scene, and received her dying wishes.—“He has no father,” said
she, weeping in remembrance of the gallant husband she had lost; “but
to you I consign this jewel of my heart, the dear and only pledge of
my true and loyal love. Whatever crime I have committed since the loss
of Glenarvon, my only protector, let not a shade of it be cast upon my
son, to sully the bright splendor of his father’s fame! Promise a dying
mother to protect her child, should he be restored to his grandfather’s
titles and fortunes. To you, to you I entrust him. Ah! see that he be
safely conducted to his own country.”

The Italian Count promised all that Lady Glenarvon desired; and wept
as he kissed the faded cheek of the English boy. But no sooner was the
momentary interest which he had conceived for the unhappy sufferer at
an end—no sooner had Lady Glenarvon expired, than, disregarding her last
request, he sought only to render himself useful and necessary to her son.
For this purpose he eagerly assisted him in all his pursuits, however
criminal, and whilst he lived upon the sums which were regularly sent
from Ireland to supply the necessary expences of his charge, he lost no
opportunity of flattering Lord de Ruthven, the present possessor of the
estate, and conniving with him in the means of detaining Glenarvon in
Italy, and thus depriving him of a great share of his property. Gondimar’s
lessons were, however, unnecessary; Glenarvon soon emancipated himself
from his tuition; and the utmost the base Italian could boast, was that
he had assisted in perverting a heart already by nature, but too well
inclined to misuse the rare gifts with which it had been endowed.

Glenarvon passed the first years after his mother’s death, in visiting
Rome and Florence. He, after this, expressed a wish of entering the
navy; and having obtained his desire, he served under the command of Sir
George Buchanan. He even distinguished himself in his new profession;
but having done so, abruptly left it.

Love, it was said, was the cause of this sudden change in Glenarvon’s
intentions.—Love for the most beautiful woman in Florence. Young as he
then was, his talents and personal attractions soon gained the object of
his pursuit; but a dreadful tragedy followed this success. The husband of
Fiorabella revenged the stigma cast upon his wife’s fame, by instantly
sacrificing her to his vengeance; and, since that fatal deed, neither
the chevalier nor Glenarvon had ever again appeared in Florence.

Some said that the unhappy victim had found an avenger; but the proud and
noble family of the chevalier, preserved a faithful silence concerning
that transaction. Glenarvon’s youth prevented any suspicion from falling
upon him; and the death of Giardini was ascribed to another, and a more
dangerous hand. Strange rumours were also circulated in Ireland, after
this event; it was every where affirmed that Glenarvon had been secretly
murdered; and Lady Margaret, then at Naples, had even written to apprize
her brother of the report.




CHAPTER IV.


About the time of the disappearance of Glenarvon, Captain Buchanan died;
and Lady Margaret expected that Lord Dartford would immediately fulfil
his engagement, and reward her long and devoted attachment to himself
by the offer of his hand. Count Gondimar was with her at the time. In
all companies, in all societies, the marriage was considered certain.
One alone seemed eager to hear this report contradicted—one who, dazzled
by the charms and beauty of Lady Margaret, had devoted himself, from
the first hour in which he had beheld her, entirely to her service. The
name of the young enthusiast was Viviani. A deep melancholy preyed upon
his spirits; a dark mystery enveloped his fate. Gondimar had, with some
coldness, introduced him to Lady Margaret. He was the friend of the lost
Glenarvon, he said, and on that account alone he had strong claims upon
his affection. Lady Margaret received the stranger with more than common
civility: his ill state of health, his youth, his beauty, were powerful
attractions. He confided his sorrows to her bosom; and soon he dared to
inform her that he loved.

Lady Margaret was now more than usually attentive to Lord Dartford: the
day even for her intended nuptials was fixed. “Oh give not that hand to
one who values not the prize,” said the young Count Viviani, throwing
himself before her; “let not Dartford call himself your lord; his love
and mine must never be compared.” “Go, foolish boy,” said Lady Margaret,
smiling on her new victim: “I can be your friend as readily when I am
Lord Dartford’s wife as now.” Her young admirer shuddered, and rose from
the earth: “You must be mine alone:—none other shall approach you.” “The
disparity of our ages.” “What of that?” “Enough, enough. I will give my
hand to Dartford; my heart, you know, will still be at your disposal.” A
deep blush covered the pale cheeks of Viviani, he uttered one convulsive
sigh, and left her to ruminate on his hopeless fate; for every thing,
he was informed, was prepared for the approaching nuptials.

But they knew little of the nature of man, who could conceive that Lord
Dartford had even a thought of uniting himself to Lady Margaret by any
lasting ties. On the contrary, he suddenly and secretly, without even
taking leave of her, departed for England; and the first letter which
she received from him, to inform her of his absence, announced to her,
likewise, his marriage with a lady of fortune and rank in his native
country.

Lady Margaret was at dinner with a numerous company, and amongst them
the young count, when the letters from England were placed before her.
The quivering of her lip and the rolling of her dark eye might have
betrayed, to a keen observer, the anguish of a disordered spirit; but,
recovering herself with that self-command which years of crime and deep
dissimulation had taught her, she conversed as usual, till it was time
for her to depart; and only when in her own apartment, closing the door,
gave vent to the fury that opprest her. For some moments she paced the
room in silent anguish; then kneeling down and calling upon those powers,
whose very existence she had so often doubted: “Curse him! curse him!”
she exclaimed. “O may the curse of a bitter, and deeply injured heart,
blast every promise of his happiness; pursue him through life; and
follow him to the grave!—May he live to be the scorn of his enemies, the
derision of the world, without one friend to soften his afflictions!—May
those, whom he has cherished, forsake him in the hour of need; and the
companion he has chosen, prove a serpent to betray him!—May the tear of
agony, which his falsehood has drawn from these eyes, fall with tenfold
bitterness from his own!—And may this blooming innocent, this rival,
who has supplanted me in his affections, live to feel the pangs she has
inflicted on my soul; or perish in the pride of her youth, with a heart
as injured, as lacerated as mine!—Oh if there are curses yet unnamed,
prepared by an angry God, against offending man, may they fall upon the
head of this false, this cold-hearted Dartford!”

She arose, and gasped for breath. She threw up the sash of the window;
but the cool air, the distant lashing of the waves, the rising moon and
the fine scene before her, had no power to calm, even for one moment,
a heart torn by guilt and tortured by self-reproach. A knock at the
door roused her from her meditations. It was the fair Italian boy, he
had followed her; for, at a glance, he had penetrated her secret. With
a smile of scorn he upbraided her for her weakness.—“What! in tears
lady!” he said: “is it possible? can a marriage, a disappointment in
love, overpower you thus!” Lady Margaret affecting a calmness, she could
not feel, and opposing art to art, endeavoured to repel his taunting
expressions. But he knew her thoughts: he saw at once through the smiles
and assumed manners which blinded others; and at this moment he watched
her countenance with malignant delight. It was the face of an Angel,
distorted by the passions of a Dæmon; and he liked it not the less for
the frailty it betrayed.

It happened, however, that he had just attained the means of turning the
tide of her resentment out of its present channel, and, by awakening her
ambition—her ruling passion, of at once quenching the dying embers of
every softer feeling. “You have read I perceive,” said he, “but one of
the epistles with which you have been favoured; and I am already before
hand with you in hearing news of far greater importance than the loss of
a lover.”—The Duchess of Altamonte. “What of her?” “After a few hours
illness,” continued Viviani, drawing one of the English papers from
his pocket, “the Duchess of Altamonte is safely delivered of a son and
heir.” The blood forsook Lady Margaret’s lips: “I am lost then!” she
said: “the vengeance of Heaven has overtaken me! where shall I turn for
succour? Is there none upon earth to whom I can apply for assistance?
Will no one of all those who profess so much, assist me? Shall Dartford
triumph, and my son be supplanted? Revenge—revenge me, and I will be
your slave.”

If the name of love must be given alike to the noblest and most depraved
of feelings, the young Viviani loved Lady Margaret with all the fervor
of which his perverted heart was capable. She had made him the weak
instrument of her arts; and knowing him too well, to place herself in
his power, she had detained him near her, by all the varying stratagems
of which she was mistress.—He now knelt before her, and, reading in
her fierce countenance her dreadful wishes, “I will revenge thee,” he
said, “yes it shall be done!” “Blood—blood is the price!” said Lady
Margaret. “Seal the compact thus:—be mine but for one hour:—let me fancy
myself blest—and: ....” “My son must be Duke of Altamonte,” returned
Lady Margaret, deeply agitated.—“He shall.”—“Swear it, my loveliest, my
youngest friend!”—“By the living God of Heaven, I swear it.”—“Ah! but
your courage will fail at the moment: your heart, intrepid as I think
it, will shudder, and misgive you.—Say where, and how, it can be done
with safety.” “Leave that to me: keep your own counsel: I will do the
rest.” He spoke, and left her.

When they met again, the following day, not one word was uttered upon
the dreadful subject of their former discourse: the compact between them
was considered as made: and when once again the Count Viviani spoke
of his passion, and his hopes, Lady Margaret reminded him of his vow;
and a fearful silence ensued. Revenge and ambition had urged her to a
determination, which a sentiment of prudence inclined her to retract.
Viviani unconscious of her wavering resolution, enjoyed a momentary
triumph. “Is not this extacy?” he exclaimed, as he viewed the woman
he now considered as entirely bound to him. “Is it not rapture thus
to love?” “Revenge is sweet,” she answered. “Will you give yourself to
me Margaret? Shall I indeed press you to my burning heart! say—can you
love?” “Aye, and hate too,” she replied, as, convulsed with agony, she
shrunk from the caresses of her importunate admirer.

From that hour he courted her with unremitting assiduity: he was the slave
of every new caprice, which long indulgence of every selfish feeling
could awaken. But the promised hour of his happiness was delayed; and
his passion thus continually fed by hope, and yet disappointed, overcame
in his bosom every feeling of humanity, till he no longer cherished a
thought that did not tend to facilitate the immediate gratification of
his wishes.




CHAPTER V.


It was not long after Lady Margaret’s arrival at the castle that Count
Gondimar, who had accompanied her to Ireland, prepared to return to Italy.
A few evenings before he quitted her, he sought the secret habitation of
his friend Viviani who had likewise followed Lady Margaret to Ireland,
but in order to facilitate his designs, had never openly appeared at the
castle. “How strong must be the love,” said Gondimar, addressing him,
“which can thus lead you to endure concealment, straits and difficulty!
return with me: there are others as fair: your youthful heart pictures
to yourself strange fancies; but in reality this woman is little worth
you. I love her not, and it is but imagination, which thus deceives
you.” “I will not leave her—I cannot go,” said Viviani impatiently:
“one burning passion annihilates in my heart every other consideration.
Ah! can it merit the name of passion, the phrenzy which rages within
me! Gondimar, if I worshipped the splendid star, that flashed along my
course, and dazzled me with its meteor blaze, even in Italian climes,
imagine what she now appears to me, in these cold northern regions. I
too can sometimes pause to think whether the sacrifice I have made is
not too great. But I have drained the poisoned cup to the dregs. I have
prest the burning firebrand to my heart, till it has consumed me—and
come what may, now, I am resolved she shall be mine, though the price
exacted were blood.” Gondimar shuddered.

It was soon after this, that he returned to Italy. Before he departed,
he once more in secret affectionately embraced his friend. “She has
deceived me,” cried Viviani; “months have glided by in vain attempts to
realize her depraved wish. She evades my suit. But the hour of success
approaches:—to-morrow:——nay, perhaps, to-night.... If thou, Gondimar—oh!
if thou couldst believe: yet wherefore should I betray myself, or shew,
to living man, one thought belonging to the darkest of human hearts.
This alone know—I dare do every thing; and I will possess her. See,
she appears—that form of majesty—that brow of refulgent brightness. The
very air I breathe speaks to me of her charms. What matters it to me,
whilst I gaze entranced upon her, if the earth shake to its foundation,
and rivers of blood were streaming around me!—Pity me, Gondimar.—Pardon
me.—Farewell!”

Hurried on by mad passion, Viviani, who constantly visited Lady Margaret,
was now upon the eve of fulfilling her wishes. Yet once, in the hope of
dissuading his savage mistress from her bloody purpose, he placed the
infant in her arms, and bade her take pity on its helpless innocence.
“See thy own—thy brother’s image in those eyes—that smile,” he whispered;
“ah! can you have the heart?” But Lady Margaret turned from the child in
haughty displeasure, thrusting it from her as if afraid to look on it;
and, for many days, would not vouchsafe to speak to the weak instrument
of her criminal ambition. Yet he, even he, whose life had been one
continued course of profligacy, who had misused his superior talents to
the perversion of the innocence of others, and the gratification of his
own ungoverned passions, shuddered at the thought of the fearful crime
which he had engaged himself to commit!

His knowledge of human nature, and particularly of the worst part of
it, was too profound to depend upon any personal or immediate aid from
Lady Margaret: he, therefore, conceived a project which, by any one but
himself, would, in every view of it, have been considered as altogether
desperate and impracticable. It was, however, a maxim with Viviani, which
his practice and experience had justified, that nothing is impossible to
a firmly united league of time, money and resolution. Alone, he could
have accomplished nothing; but he had a satellite long trained in his
service, who possessed every quality which fitted him to assist the
designs of such a master. The name of this man was La Crusca. In spite
of a seeming wish to conceal himself, in conformity, perhaps, with his
master’s designs, this man was known at the castle to be a servant to
the count, and by his flattery and the versatility of his genius, had
become familiar with a few of its inhabitants; but shortly after his
arrival, he had been dismissed, and it was now three months and more
since his departure.

One evening, according to custom, Viviani having secretly entered the
castle, sought Lady Margaret in her own apartment; his face was fearfully
pale; his hand trembled. He found her in company with her son, Buchanan,
and Calantha. Alarmed at his manner and appearance, the latter concealed
her face on the white bosom of her aunt, nor guessed by what storms of
fierce passion that bosom was disturbed. Viviani mistook the brilliant
hue which heightened Lady Margaret’s complexion for a softer feeling; he
approached her, and, gently removing the child, whispered vows of ardour
and tenderness in the ears of his mistress, and urged his suit with every
argument he could devise to overcome any remaining scruple. But when
he looked, in expectation of a favorable answer, he sprung back with
terror from her; for it seemed as if the fiends of hell were struggling
in her eyes and lips for looks and words with which to express their
horrid desire, already without the aid of words, but too sufficiently
manifest! At length, breaking silence, and rising in scorn from her
seat: “Have I not promised myself to you?” she whispered indignantly,
“that you thus persecute me for the performance of a voluntary vow? Do
you think your protestations can move, and your arguments persuade? Am
I a timid girl, who turns from your suit bashful or alarmed? Or am I one
grown old in crime, and utterly insensible to its consequence?—Nothing,
you well know, can make me yours but my own free will; and never shall
that will consign me to such fate, till the sickly weed is destroyed,
and the fair and flourishing plant restored to its wonted vigour and
due honors. See there, there is the image of my brother, of all that is
glorious and lovely.” As she spoke, she pointed to Buchanan.... “Lady,
the deed is already done! This night,” said the Italian, trembling in
every limb, “yes, on this fearful night, I claim the performance of thy
vow!” He spoke with an emotion she could not mistake.—“Is it possible?”
said she, “my beautiful, my beloved friend:” and his hand trembled as
he gave it her, in token of his assent.—Fearing to utter another word,
dreading even the sound of their own voices, after such a disclosure,
she soon retired.

Was it to rest that Lady Margaret retired?—No—to the tortures of
suspense, of dread, of agony unutterable. A thousand times she started
from her bed:—she fancied that voices approached the door—that shrieks
rent the air; and, if she closed her eyes, visions of murder floated
before her distracted mind, and pictured dreams too horrible for words
half suffocated by the fever and delirium of her troubled imagination.
She threw up the sash of her window, and listened attentively to every
distant sound. The moon had risen in silvery brightness above the dark
elm trees; it lighted, with its beams, the deep clear waters of Elle. The
wind blew loud at times, and sounded mournfully, as it swept through the
whispering leaves of the trees, over the dark forest and distant moors.
A light appeared, for one moment, near the wood, and then was lost, Lady
Margaret, as if palsied by terror, remained fixed and breathless on the
spot;—a step approached the door;—it was the step of one stealing along,
as if anxious no one should hear it pass. Again, all was silent:—so silent
that the grave itself had not been more tranquil, and the dead could
not have looked more pale, more calm, more still, than Lady Margaret!

But how was that silence broken? and how that calm disturbed?—By the
shrieks of an agonized parent—by the burning tears of a heart-broken
father—by the loud unrestrained clamours of the menial train; and that
proud mansion, so lately the seat of gaiety, whose lighted porticos
and festive halls had echoed to the song of joy and revelry, presented
now a scene of lamentation, terror and despair.—The heir of Altamonte
was dead—the hope so fondly cherished was cut off—the idol, upon whose
existence so many hearts were fixed, lay in his gilded cradle and costly
attire, affording a lesson impressive although every day repeated, yet
unheeded although impressive,—that it is the nature of man to rest his
most sanguine expectations upon the most frail and uncertain of all his
possessions.

The women who had been employed to attend upon him were weeping around
him. His nurse alone appeared utterly insensible to his fate,—her eyes
were fixed,—her lips motionless,—she obeyed every command that was given;
but, when left to herself, she continued in the same sullen mood. Some
called her hard and unfeeling, as in loud accents they bewailed the dire
calamity that had fallen on their master’s house; but there were others
who knew that this apparent insensibility was the effect of a deeper
feeling—of a heart that could not recover its loss—of a mind totally
overthrown.

She had arisen that morning at her accustomed hour, to take to her breast
the little infant who slept in the cradle beside her;—but lifeless was
that form which, a few hours before, she had laid on its pillow, in the
full enjoyment of health. Spasms, it was supposed, had seized the child in
his sleep; for his face was black and dreadfully disfigured. All efforts
to recover him were fruitless. Physician nor medicine could avail,—the
hand of death had struck the flower,—the vital spark was extinguished.

It was in vain that the distracted mother, pressing his cold lips to
hers, declared, in the agony of hope, that they still retained a living
warmth.—It was in vain that she watched him till her eyes deceived,
fancied that they saw a change imperceptible to others—a breath of life
restored to that lifeless breathless form. It was in vain:—and floods
of grief, with the sad rites of a pompous funeral, were all which the
afflicted Duke and his sorrowing family had to bestow.

The tenants and peasantry were, according to an ancient custom, admitted
to sing the song of sorrow over the body of the child: but no hired
mourners were required on this occasion; for the hearts of all deeply
shared in the affliction of their master’s house, and wept, in bitter
woe, the untimely loss of their infant Lord.—It was thus they sung, ever
repeating the same monotonous and melancholy strain.

     Oh loudly sing the Pillalu,
       And many a tear of sorrow shed;
     _Och orro, orro, Olalu_;
       Mourn, for the master’s child is dead.

     At morn, along the eastern sky,
       We marked an owl, with heavy wing;
     At eve, we heard the benshees cry;
       And now the song of death we sing;
                                     _Och orro, orro, Olalu_.

     Ah! wherefore, wherefore would ye die;
       Why would ye leave your parents dear;
     Why leave your sorrowing kinsmen here,
       Nor listen to your people’s cry!

     How wilt thy mother bear to part
       With one so tender, fair and sweet!
     Thou wast the jewel of her heart,
       The pulse, the life, that made it beat.

     How sad it is to leave her boy,
       That tender flowret all alone;
     To see no more his face of joy,
       And soothe no more his infant moan!

     But see along the mountains side,
       And by the pleasant banks of Larney,
     Straight o’er the plains, and woodlands wide,
       By Castle Brae, and Lock Macharney:

     See how the sorrowing neighbours throng.
       With haggard looks and faultering breath;
     And as they slowly wind along,
       They sing the mournful song of death!

     O loudly sing the Pillalu,
       And many a tear of sorrow shed;
     _Och orro, orro, Olalu_;
       Mourn, for the master’s child is dead.

Thus singing they approached the castle, and thus amidst cries and
lamentations, was Sidney Albert, Marquis of Delaval, borne for ever
from its gates, and entombed with his ancestors in the vault of the
ancient church, which, for many hundred years, had received beneath its
pavement the successive generations of the family of Altamonte. Heartfelt
tears, more honourable to the dead than all the grandeur which his rank
demanded, were shed over his untimely grave; while a long mourning and
entire seclusion from the world, proved that the sorrow thus felt was
not momentary, but lasting as the cause which had occasioned it was great.




CHAPTER VI.


As sickness falls heaviest on those who are in the full enjoyment of
health, so grief is most severe, when it comes unexpectedly, in the
midst of happiness.—It was from this cause, that the Duke, more than any
one in his family, gave vent to the sorrows of his heart; and murmured
at the irrecoverable loss, by which he had been afflicted. The Duchess
in vain attempted to share, and lessen the regret of her husband:—he
had that haughtiness of mind which disdains all confidence, and flies
from all consolation. But of her far keener suffering, for the loss
she had sustained, little shew was made; for real misery delights not
in reproaches and complaints. It is like charity and love—silent, long
suffering and mild.

There are virtues which admit of no description—which inspire on the first
mention of them but little interest. Great faults and heroic qualities,
may be pourtrayed; but those milder merits which contribute so much
to the comfort and happiness of life—that sweetness of disposition, to
which every hour that passes by, bears an approving testimony, can be
only felt, enjoyed and regretted. Benevolence that never fails, patience
under the heaviest calamities, firmness in friendship under every trying
change—these are among its characteristic features; and these were all
possessed by the Duchess of Altamonte, who seemed to live for no other
purpose than to endear herself to those who surrounded her.

With this consideration for others, and forgetfulness of self, she had
apparently endured the loss of her son with greater fortitude, than had
been expected: indeed she sustained it with a degree of firmness which
religion alone could have inspired: she murmured not; but submitted to
the trial with the meek spirit of pious resignation.—“My dear, dear
boy, my pretty Albert” would sometimes escape her, and a few tears
would wait upon the exclamation; but her whole study was to share the
disappointment, and lighten the sorrows of her husband; as well as to
check the intemperate complaints, and soothe the more violent agitations
of Lady Margaret.

But while the soul of the Duchess rose superior to the ills of life,
her constitution, weakened by a long period of ill health, and by the
agitations of extreme sensibility, was not in a state to resist so great
a shock; and though she lingered upwards of a year, the real cause of
her death could not be mistaken:—an inward melancholy preyed upon her
spirits, which she combated in vain.—“Many have smiled in adversity,”
she would say; “but it is left for me to weep in prosperity:—such is
the will of Heaven, and I resign myself as becomes me, to that power,
which knows when to give, and when to take away.”

On her death-bed, she said to the Duke: “This is a hard trial for you
to bear; but God, who, when he sends trials, can send strength also,
will, I trust, support you.—You will pursue your career with that honour
and dignity, which has hitherto distinguished it—nor would my feeble
aid assist you in it; but I, on the contrary, like a weak unsupported
plant, must have drooped and pined away, had I lived to survive the
tender and faithful friend, who has guided and sustained me. It is far
better, as it is. You will be a guardian and protector to my Calantha,
whose quickness and vivacity, make me tremble for her. I could not have
watched over her, and directed her as I ought. But to you, while she
smiles, and plays around you, and fills the space which I so soon must
leave,—to you, she will prove a dear and constant interest. Never, my
dearest Altamonte, ah! never suffer her to be absent, if possible, from
your guiding care:—her spirits, her passions, are of a nature to prove a
blessing, or the reverse, according to the direction they are permitted
to take. Watch over and preserve her—are my last words to you.—Protect
and save her from all evil—is the last prayer I offer to my God, before
I enter into his presence.” ...

Calantha! unhappy child, whom not even the pangs of death could tear
from the love, and remembrance of thy mother,—what hours of agony were
thine, when a father’s hand first tore thee from that lifeless bosom,—when
piercing shrieks declared the terror of thy mind, oppressed, astonished at
the first calamity, by which it had been tried,—when thy lips tremblingly
pronounced for the last time, the name of mother—a name so dear, so sacred
and beloved, that its very sound awakens in the heart, all that it can
feel of tenderness and affection! What is left that shall replace her?
What friend, what tie, shall make up for her eternal absence? What even
are the present sufferings of the orphan child, to the dreary void, the
irreparable loss she will feel through all her future years. It was on
that bosom, she had sought for comfort, when passion and inadvertence
had led her into error. It was that gentle, that dear voice, which had
recalled her from error, even when severity had failed.—There is, in
every breast, some one affection that predominates over the rest—there
is still to all some one object, to which the human heart is rivetted
beyond all others:—in Calantha’s bosom, the love of her mother prevailed
over every other feeling.

A long and violent illness succeeded, in Calantha, the torpor which
astonishment and terror at her loss had produced; and from this state,
she recovered only to give way to a dejection of mind not less alarming:
but even her grief was to be envied, when compared with the disorder
of Lady Margaret’s mind.—Remorse preyed upon her heart, the pride and
hardness of which, disdained the humility of acknowledging her offence
in the presence of her Creator.

The great effort of Lady Margaret was to crush the struggles of passion;
and when, at times, the agony of her mind was beyond endurance, she found
it some relief to upbraid the wretch who had fulfilled her own guilty
wishes.—“Monster!” she would exclaim, “without one tender or honourable
feeling, take those detested and bloody hands from my sight:—they have
destroyed the loveliest innocent that was ever born to bless a mother’s
wishes:—that mother now appears in awful judgment against thee:—out,
out, perfidious wretch!—come not near—gaze not upon me.”—Viviani marked
the wild expression of her eye—the look of horror which she cast upon
him; and a deep and lasting resentment succeeded in his breast, to every
feeling of attachment. Seizing her hand, which he wrung in scorn: “What
mean you by this mockery of tardy penitence?” he fiercely cried.—“Woman,
beware how you trifle with the deep pangs of an injured heart:—not upon
me—not upon me, be the blood of the innocent:—it was this hand, white
and spotless as it appears, which sealed his doom:—I should have shewn
mercy; but an unrelenting tigress urged me on.—On thee—on thine, be the
guilt, till it harrow up thy soul to acts of phrenzy and despair:—hope
not for pardon from man—seek not for mercy from God.—Away with those
proud looks which once subdued me:—I can hate—I have learned of thee
to hate; and my heart, released from thy bonds, is free at last:—spurn
me,—what art thou now? A creature so wretched and so fallen, that I
can almost pity thee.—Farewell.—For the last time, I look on thee with
one sentiment of love.—When we meet again, tremble:—yes—proud as thou
art, tremble; for, however protracted, thou shalt find the vengeance of
Viviani, as certain, as it is terrible.”

“Is it possible,” said Lady Margaret, gazing upon that beautiful and
youthful countenance—upon that form which scarcely had attained to
manhood,—“is it in the compass of probability that one so young should
be so utterly hardened?” Viviani smiled on her and left her.—Very shortly
after this interview, he quitted Ireland, vainly endeavouring in the hour
of his departure to conceal the deep emotion by which he was agitated
at thus tearing himself from one who appeared utterly indifferent to
his hatred, his menaces, or his love.




CHAPTER VII.


The habit of years, though broken and interrupted by violent affliction
or sudden prosperity, fails not in the end to resume its influence over
the mind; and the course that was once pursued with satisfaction, though
the tempest of our passions may have hurried us out of it, will be again
resumed, when the dark clouds that gathered over us, have spent their
fury. Even he who is too proud to bow his mind to the inevitable decrees
of an all wise Creator,—who seeks not to be consoled, and turns away
from the voice of piety, even he loses sight at length of the affliction,
upon which his memory has so continually dwelt:—it lessens to his view,
as he journies onward adown the vale of life, and the bright beam of
hope rises at last upon his clouded spirits and exhausted frame.

From a state of despondency and vain regret, in which more than a year
had been passed, the inhabitants of Castle Delaval, by slow degrees,
revived; and the Duke, wearied of a life so gloomy and solitary, summoned,
as before, his friends around him. Lady Margaret, however, was no longer
the gay companion of his morning walks, the life and amusement of his
evening assemblies. The absence of Viviani filled her with anxiety; and
the remembrance of her crimes embittered every hour of her existence.
If she turned her eyes upon Calantha, the dejected expression of that
countenance reproached her for the mother whose life she had shortened,
and whose place she vainly exerted herself to fill; if upon the Duke,
in that care worn cheek and brow of discontent, she was more painfully
reminded of her crime and ingratitude; and even the son for whom so much
had been sacrificed, afforded her no consolation.

Buchanan estranged himself from her confidence, and appeared jealous of
her authority.—He refused to aid her in the sole remaining wish of her
heart; and absolutely declined accepting the hand of Calantha. “Shall
only one will,” he said, “be studied and followed; shall Calantha’s
caprices and desires be daily attended to; and shall I see the best
years of my life pass without pleasure or profit for me? I know—I see
your intention; and, pardon me, dearest mother, if I already bitterly
lament it. Is Calantha a companion fitted for one of my character; and,
even if hereafter it is your resolve to unite me to her, must I now be
condemned to years of inactivity on her account. Give me my liberty; send
me to college, there to finish my education; and permit me to remain in
England for some years.”

Lady Margaret saw, in the cool determined language of her son, that he had
long meditated this escape from her thraldom:—she immediately appeared
to approve his intention—she said that a noble ambition, and all the
highest qualities of the heart and mind were shewn in his present desire;
but one promise she must exact in return for the readiness with which
she intended instantly to accede to his request:—provided he was left
at liberty till a maturer age, would he promise to take no decisive step
of himself, until he had once more seen Calantha after this separation?
To this Buchanan willingly acceded; his plans were soon arranged; and
his departure was fixed for no very distant period.

The morning before he left the castle, Lady Margaret called him to
her room; and taking him and Calantha by the hand, she led them to the
windows of the great gallery. From thence pointing to the vast prospect
of woods and hills, which extended to a distance, the eye could scarcely
reach, “all are yours my children,” she said, “if, obedient to parents
who have only your welfare at heart, you persevere in your intention of
being one day united to each other. Ah! let no disputes, no absence, no
fancies have power to direct you from the fulfilment of this, my heart’s
most fervent wish:—let this moment of parting, obliterate every unkind
feeling, and bind you more than ever to each other. Here, Buchanan,”
continued she, “is a bracelet with your hair: place it yourself around
Calantha’s arm:—she shall wear it till you meet.” The bracelet was
of gold, adorned with diamonds, and upon the clasp, under the initial
letters of both their names, were engraved these words: “_Stesso sangue,
Stessa sorte._” “Take it,” said Buchanan, fastening it upon the arm of
Calantha, “and remember that you are to wear it ever, for my sake.”

At this moment, even he was touched, as he pressed her to his heart, and
remembered her as associated with all the scenes of his happiest days.
Her violence, her caprices, her mad frolics, were forgotten; and as her
tears streamed upon his bosom, he turned away, least his mother should
witness his emotion. Yet Calantha’s tears were occasioned solely by the
thought of parting from one, who had hitherto dwelt always beneath the
same roof with herself; and to whom long habit had accustomed, rather
than attached her.—In youth the mind is so tender, and so alive to sudden
and vivid impressions, that in the moment of separation it feels regret,
and melancholy at estranging itself even from those for whom before it
had never felt any warmth of affection.—Still at the earliest age the
difference is distinctly marked between the transient tear, that falls
for imaginary woe, and the real misery which attends upon the loss of
those who have been closely united to the affections by ties, stronger
and dearer than those of habit.




CHAPTER VIII.


The accomplishment of her favourite views being thus disappointed, or
at least deferred, Lady Margaret resolved to return to Italy, and there
to seek for Viviani. Her brother, however, entreated her to remain with
him. He invited his friends, his relations, his neighbours. Balls and
festivities once more enlivened the castle: it seemed his desire to raze
every trace of sorrow from the memory of his child; and to conceal the
ravages of death under the appearance at least of wild and unceasing
gaiety.—The brilliant _fêtes_, and the magnificence of the Duke of
Altamonte and his sister, became the constant theme of admiration; from
far, from near, fashion and folly poured forth their victims to grace
and to enjoy them; and Lord and Lady Dartford naturally found their place
amidst the various and general assemblage. To see Lord Dartford again, to
triumph over his falsehood, to win him from an innocent confiding wife,
and then betray him at the moment in which he fancied himself secure,
this vengeance was yet wanting to satisfy the restless fever of Lady
Margaret’s mind; and the contemplation of its accomplishment gave a new
object, a new hope to her existence; for Lady Margaret had preferred
enduring even the tortures of remorse, to the listless insipidity of
stagnant life, where the passions of her heart, were without excitement,
and those talents of which she felt the power, useless and obscured.
What indeed would she not have preferred to the society of Mrs. Seymour
and her daughters?

The Duchess of Altamonte had possessed a mind, as cultivated as her own,
and a certain refinement of manner which is sometimes acquired by long
intercourse with the most polished societies, but is more frequently the
gift of nature, and, if it be not the constant attendant upon nobility
of blood, is very rarely found in those who are not distinguished by
that adventitious and accidental circumstance.

Mrs. Seymour had many of the excellent qualities, but none of the rare
endowments possessed by the Duchess; she was a strict follower of the
paths of custom and authority; in the steps which had been marked by
others, she studiously walked, nor thought it allowable to turn aside
for any object however praiseworthy and desirable. She might be said to
delight in prejudice—to enjoy herself in the obscure and narrow prison
to which she had voluntarily confined her intellects—to look upon the
impenetrable walls around her as bulwarks against the hostile attacks
by which so many had been overcome. The daughters were strictly trained
in the opinions of their mother. “The season of youth,” she would say,
“is the season of instruction;” —and consequently every hour had its
allotted task; and every action was directed according to some established
regulation.

By these means, Sophia and Frances were already highly accomplished;
their manners were formed; their opinions fixed, and any contradictions
of those opinions, instead of raising doubt, or urging to enquiry, only
excited in their minds astonishment at the hardihood and contempt for
the folly which thus opposed itself to the final determination of the
majority, and ventured to disturb the settled empire and hereditary right
of their sentiments and manners.—“These are _your_ pupils,” Lady Margaret
would often exultingly cry, addressing the mild Mrs. Seymour—“these
paragons of propriety—these sober minded steady automatons. Well, I mean
no harm to them or you. I only wish I could shake off a little of that
cold formality which petrifies me. Now see how differently _my_ Calantha
shall appear, when I have opened her mind, and formed her according
to _my_ system of education—the system which nature dictates and every
feeling of the heart willingly accedes to. Observe well the difference
between a child of an acute understanding, before her mind has been
disturbed by the absurd opinions of others, and after she has learned
their hackneyed jargon: note her answer—her reflections; and you will
find in them, all that philosophy can teach, and all to which science
and wisdom must again return. But, in your girls and in most of those
whom we meet, how narrow are the views, how little the motives, by which
they are impelled. Even granting that they act rightly,—that by blindly
following, where others lead, they pursue the safest course, is there
any thing noble, any thing superior in the character from which such
actions spring? _I_ am ambitious for Calantha. I wish her not only to
be virtuous; I will acknowledge it,—I wish her to be distinguished and
great.”

Mrs. Seymour, when thus attacked, always permitted Lady Margaret to
gain the victory of words and to triumph over her as much as the former
thought it within the bounds of good breeding to allow herself; but she
never varied, in consequence, one step in her daily course, or deviated
in the slightest degree from the line of conduct which she had before
laid down.

Sometimes, however, she would remonstrate with her niece, when she saw
her giving way to the violence of her temper, or acting, as she thought,
absurdly or erroneously; and Calantha, when thus admonished, would
acknowledge her errors, and, for a time at least, endeavour to amend
them; for her heart was accessible to kindness, and kindness she at all
times met with from Mrs. Seymour and her daughters.

It was indeed Calantha’s misfortune to meet with too much kindness, or
rather too much indulgence from almost all who surrounded her. The Duke,
attentive solely to her health, watched her with the fondest solicitude,
and the wildest wishes her fancy could invent, were heard with the most
scrupulous attention and gratified with the most unbounded compliance.
Yet, if affection, amounting to idolatry, could in any degree atone for
the pain the errors of his child too often occasioned him, that affection
was felt by Calantha for her Father.

Her feelings indeed swelled with a tide too powerful for the unequal
resistance of her understanding:—her motives appeared the very best,
but the actions which resulted from them were absurd and exaggerated.
Thoughts, swift as lightening, hurried through her brain:—projects,
seducing, but visionary crowded upon her view: without a curb she followed
the impulse of her feelings; and those feelings varied with every varying
interest and impression.

Such character is not uncommon, though rarely seen amongst the higher
ranks of society. Early and constant intercourse with the world, and that
polished sameness which results from it, smooths away all peculiarities;
and whilst it assimilates individuals to each other, corrects many
faults, and represses many virtues.

Some indeed there are who affect to differ from others: but the very
affectation proves that, in fact, they resemble the ordinary mass; and
in general this assumption of singularity is found in low and common
minds, who think that the reputation of talent and superiority belongs
to the very defects and absurdities which alone have too often cast a
shade upon the splendid light of genius, and degraded the hero and the
poet, to the level of their imitators.

Lovely indeed is that grace of manner, that perfect ease and refinement
which so many attempt to acquire, and for which it is to be feared so
much too often is renounced—the native vigour of mind, the blush of
indignant and offended integrity, the open candour of truth, and all
the long list of modest unassuming virtues, known only to a new and
unsullied heart.

Calantha turned with disgust from the slavish followers of prejudice.
She disdained the beaten tract, and she thought that virtue would be for
her a safe, a sufficient guide; that noble views, and pure intentions
would conduct her in a higher sphere; and that it was left to her to set
a bright example of unshaken rectitude, undoubted truth and honourable
fame. All that was base or mean, she, from her soul, despised; a fearless
spirit raised her, as she fondly imagined, above the vulgar herd; self
confident, she scarcely deigned to bow the knee before her God; and man,
as she had read of him in history, appeared too weak, too trivial to
inspire either alarm or admiration.

It was thus, with bright prospects, strong love of virtue, high ideas
of honour, that she entered upon life. No expence, no trouble had been
spared in her education; masters, tutors and governesses surrounded her.
She seemed to have a decided turn for every thing it was necessary for her
to learn; instruction was scarcely necessary, so readily did her nature
bend itself to every art, science and accomplishment; yet never did she
attain excellence, or make proficiency in any; and when the vanity of
a parent fondly expected to see her a proficient in all acquirements,
suited to her sex and age, he had the mortification of finding her more
than usually ignorant, backward and uninstructed. With an ear the most
sensible and accurate, she could neither dance, nor play; with an eye
acute and exact, she could not draw; with a spirit that bounded within
her from excess of joyous happiness, she was bashful and unsocial in
society; and with the germs of every virtue that commands esteem and
praise, she was already the theme of discussion, observation and censure.

Yet was Calantha loved—dearly and fondly loved; nor could Mrs. Seymour,
though constantly discovering new errors in her favourite, prevent her
from being the very idol of her heart. Calantha saw it through all her
assumed coldness; and she triumphed in the influence she possessed.
But Sophia and Frances were not as cordially her friends:—they had not
reached that age, at which lenity and indulgence take place of harsher
feelings, and the world appears in all its reality before us. To them,
the follies and frailties of others carried with them no excuse, and
every course that they themselves did not adopt, was assuredly erroneous.

Calantha passed her time as much as possible by herself; the general
society at the castle was uninteresting to her. The only being for whom
she felt regard, was Sir Everard St. Clare, brother to Camioli the bard,
and late physician to her mother, was the usual object of ridicule to
almost all of his acquaintance. Lady St. Clare in pearls and silver;
Lauriana and Jessica, more fine if possible and more absurd than their
mother; Mrs. Emmet a Lady from Cork, plaintive and reclining in white
satin and drapery; and all the young gentlemen of large property and
fortune, whom all the young ladies were daily and hourly endeavouring
to please, had no attraction for a mind like Calantha’s. Coldly she
therefore withdrew from the amusements natural to her age; yet it was from
embarrassment, and not from coldness, that she avoided their society.
Some favorites she already had:—the Abbess of Glenaa, St. Clara her
niece, and above all Alice Mac Allain, a beautiful little girl of whom
her mother had been fond, had already deeply interested her affections.

In the company of one or other of these, Calantha would pass her mornings;
and sometimes would she stand alone upon the summit of the cliff, hour
after hour, to behold the immense ocean, watching its waves, as they
swelled to the size of mountains, then dashed with impetuous force against
the rocks below; or climbing the mountain’s side, and gazing on the lofty
summits of Heremon and Inis Tara, lost in idle and visionary thought;
but at other times joyous, and without fear, like a fairy riding on a
sun beam through the air, chasing the gay images of fancy, she would
join in every active amusement and suffer her spirits to lead her into
the most extravagant excess.




CHAPTER X.


Love, it might be conjectured, would early shew itself in a character
such as Calantha’s; and love, with all its ardour and all its wildness,
had already subdued her heart. What, though Mrs. Seymour had laid it
down as a maxim, that no one, before she had attained her fourteenth
year, could possibly be in love! What, though Lady Margaret indignantly
asserted, that Calantha could not, and should not, look even at any
other than him for whom her hand was destined! She had looked; she had
seen; and what is more, she believed the impression at this time made
upon her heart was as durable as it was violent.

Sophia Seymour, Mrs. Seymour’s eldest daughter, in a month, nay in a
week, had already discovered Calantha’s secret:—the same feeling for the
same object, had given her an acuteness in this instance, with which
she was not at all times gifted:—She herself loved, and, therefore,
perceived her cousin’s passion. Calantha’s manner immediately confirmed
her in her supposition. She entered one morning into her room;—she saw
the unfinished drawing;—she could not mistake it—that commanding air—that
beaming eye—there was but one whom it could resemble, and that one was
Henry Mowbray, Earl of Avondale. She taxed Calantha bitterly with her
partiality; “But he thinks not of you,” she said, and haughtily left
the room.

Admiral Sir Richard Mowbray was an old and valued friend of the Duke
of Altamonte. He had served with Sir George Buchanan, brother-in-law
to Lady Margaret. He had no children; but his nephew, the young Earl of
Avondale, was, next to his country, the strongest and dearest interest of
his heart. What happiness must the Admiral then have felt when he beheld
his nephew; and found that, in mind and person, he was distinguished by
every fair endowment. He had entered the army young; he now commanded a
regiment: with a spirit natural to his age and character, he had embraced
his father’s profession; like him, he had early merited the honours
conferred upon him. He had sought distinction at the hazard of his life;
but happily for all who knew him well, he had not, like his gallant
father, perished in the hour of danger; but, having seen hard service,
had returned to enjoy, in his own country, the ease, the happiness and
the reputation he so well deserved.

Lord Avondale’s military occupations had not, however, prevented his
cultivating his mind and talents in no ordinary degree; and the real
distinctions he had obtained, seemed by no means to have lessened the
natural modesty of his character. He was admired, flattered, sought
after; and the strong temptation to which his youth had thus early been
exposed, had, in some measure, shaken his principles and perverted his
inclinations.

Happily a noble mind and warm uncorrupted heart soon led him from scenes
of profligacy to a course of life more manly and useful:—deep anxiety
for a bleeding country, and affection for his uncle, restored him to
himself. He quitted London, where upon his first return from abroad he
had for the most part resided, and his regiment being ordered to Ireland,
on account of the growing disaffection in that country, he returned
thither to fulfil the new duty which his profession required. Allanwater
and Monteith, his father’s estates, had been settled upon him; but he
was more than liberal in the arrangements he made for his uncle and the
other branches of his family.

Many an humbler mind had escaped the danger to which Lord Avondale had,
early in life, been exposed;—many a less open character had disguised
the too daring opinions he had once ventured to cherish! But, with an
utter contempt for all hypocrisy and art, with a frankness and simplicity
of character, sometimes observed in men of extraordinary abilities, but
never attendant on the ordinary or the corrupted mind, he appeared to
the world as he really felt, and neither thought nor studied whether
such opinions and character were agreeable to his own vanity, or the
taste of his companions; for whom, however, he was, at all times, ready
to sacrifice his time, his money, and all on earth but his honour and
integrity.

Such was the character of Lord Avondale, imperfectly sketched—but true to
nature.—He, in his twenty-first year, now appeared at Castle Delaval—the
admiration of the large and various company then assembled there.
Flattered, perhaps, by the interest shewn him, but reserved and distant
to every too apparent mark of it, he viewed the motley groupe before
him, as from a superior height, and smiled with something of disdain,
at times, as he marked the affectation, the meanness, the conceit and,
most of all, the heartlessness and cowardice of many of those around
him. Of a morning, he would not unfrequently join Calantha and Sophia
in their walks; of an evening, he would read to the former, or make her
his partner at billiards, or at cards. At such times, Sophia would work
at a little distance; and as her needle monotonously passed the silken
thread through the frame to which her embroidery was fixed, her eyes would
involuntarily turn to where her thoughts, in spite of her endeavours,
too often strayed. Calantha listened to the oft-repeated stories of the
admiral; she heard of his battles, his escapes and his dangers, when
others were weary of the well-known topics; but he was Lord Avondale’s
uncle, and that thought made every thing he uttered interesting to her.

“You love,” said Alice Mac Allain, one day to her mistress, as they
wandered in silence along the banks of the river Elle, “and he who made
you alone can tell to what these madning fires may drive a heart like
yours. Remember your bracelet—remember your promises to Buchanan; and
learn, before it is too late, in some measure to controul yourself, and
disguise your feelings.” Calantha started from Alice; for love, when it
first exists, is so timid, so sacred, that it fears the least breath of
observation, and disguises itself under every borrowed name. “You are
wrong,” said Calantha, “I would not bend my free spirit to the weakness
of which you would accuse me, for all the world can offer; your Calantha
will never acknowledge a master; will never yield her soul’s free and
immortal hopes, to any earthly affection. Fear not, my counsellor, that
I will forsake my virgin vows, or bow my unbroken spirit to that stern
despot, whose only object is power and command.”

As Calantha spoke, Lord Avondale approached, and joined them. The deep
blush that crimsoned over her cheek was a truer answer to her friend’s
accusation than the one she had just uttered.—“Heremon and Inis Tara have
charms for both of you,” he said, smiling:—“you are always wandering
either to or from thence.” “They are our own native mountains,” said
Calantha, timidly;—“the landmarks we have been taught to reverence from
our earliest youth.” “And could you not admire the black mountains
of Morne as well,” he said, fixing his eyes on Calantha,—“my native
mountains?”—“they are higher far than these, and soar above the clouds
that would obscure them.” “They are too lofty and too rugged for such
as we are,” said Calantha. “We may gaze at their height and wonder; but
more would be dangerous.” “The roses and myrtles blossom under their
shade,” said Lord Avondale, with a smile; “and Allanwater, to my mind,
is as pleasant to dwell in as Castle Delaval.” “Shall you soon return
there, my lord,” enquired Calantha. “Perhaps never,” he said, mournfully;
and a tear filled his eye as he turned away, and sought to change the
subject of conversation.

Lady Margaret had spoken to Lord Avondale:—perhaps another had engaged
his affections:—at all events, it seemed certain to Calantha that she
was not the object of his hope or his grief. To have seen him—to have
admired him, was enough for her: she wished not for more than that
privilege; she felt that every affection of her heart was engaged, even
though those affections were unreturned.




CHAPTER XI.


To suffer the pangs of unrequited love was not, in the present instance,
the destiny of Calantha. That dark eye, the lustre of whose gaze she
durst not meet, was, nevertheless, at all times fixed upon her; and the
quick mantling blush and beaming smile, which lighted the countenance
of Lord Avondale, whenever her name was pronounced before him, soon
betrayed, to all but himself and Calantha, how much and how entirely his
affections were engaged. He was of a nature not easily to be flattered
into admiration of others—not readily attracted, or lightly won; but,
once having fixed his affections, he was firm, confiding and incapable
of change, through any change of fortune. He was, besides, of that
affectionate and independent character, that as neither bribe nor power
could have moved him to one act contrary to his principles of integrity,
so neither danger, fatigue, nor any personal consideration could have
deterred him from that which he considered as the business and duty of
his life. He possessed a happy and cheerful disposition,—a frank and
winning manner,—and that hilarity of heart and countenance which rendered
him the charm and sunshine of every society.

When Lord Avondale, however, addressed Calantha, she answered him in
a cold or sullen manner, and, if he endeavoured to approach her, she
fled unconscious of the feeling which occasioned her embarrassment. Her
cousins, Sophia and Frances, secure of applause, and conscious of their
own power of pleasing, had entered the world neither absurdly timid,
nor vainly presuming:—they knew the place they were called upon to fill
in society; and they sought not to outstep the bounds which good sense
had prescribed. Calantha, on the other hand, scarce could overcome her
terror and confusion when addressed by those with whom she was little
acquainted. But how far less dangerous was this reserve than the easy
confidence which a few short years afterwards produced, and how little
did the haughty Lady Margaret imagine, as she chid her niece for this
excess of timidity, that the day would, perhaps, soon arrive when careless
of the presence of hundreds, Calantha might strive to attract their
attention, by the very arts which she now despised, or pass thoughtlessly
along, hardened and entirely insensible to their censure or their praise!

To a lover’s eyes such timidity was not unpleasing; and Lord Avondale
liked not the girl he admired the less, for that crimson blush—that timid
look, which scarcely dared encounter his ardent gaze. To him it seemed
to disclose a heart new to the world—unspoiled and guileless. Calantha’s
mind, he thought, might now receive the impression which should be
given it; and while yet free, yet untainted, would it not be happiness
to secure her as his own—to mould her according to his fancy—to be her
guide and protector through life!

Such were his feelings, as he watched her shunning even the eyes of
him, whom alone she wished to please:—such were his thoughts, when,
flying from the amusements and gaiety natural to her age, she listened
with attention, while he read to her, or conquered her fears to enter
into conversation with him. He seemed to imagine her to be possessed of
every quality which he most admired; and the delusive charm of believing
that he was not indifferent to her heart, threw a beauty and grace over
all her actions, which blinded him to every error. Thus then they both
acknowledged, and surrendered themselves to the power of love. Calantha
for the first time yielded up her heart entirely to its enchantment;
and Lord Avondale for the last.

It is said there is no happiness, and no love to be compared to that
which is felt for the first time. Most persons erroneously think so;
but love like other arts requires experience, and terror and ignorance,
on its first approach, prevent our feeling it as strongly as at a later
period. Passion mingles not with a sensation so pure, so refined as that
which Calantha then conceived, and the excess of a lover’s attachment
terrified and overpowered the feelings of a child.

Storms of fury kindled in the eye of Lady Margaret when first she observed
this mutual regard. Words could not express her indignation:—to deeds
she had recourse. Absence was the only remedy to apply; and an hour,
a moment’s delay, by opening Calantha’s mind to a consciousness of her
lover’s sentiments and wishes, might render even this ineffectual. She
saw that the flame had been kindled in a heart too susceptible, and where
opposition would encrease its force;—she upbraided her brother for his
blindness, and reproached herself for her folly. There was but one way
left, which was to communicate the Duke’s surmises and intentions to
the Admiral in terms so positive, that he could not mistake them, and
instantly to send for Buchanan. In pursuance of this purpose, she wrote
to inform him of every thing which had taken place, and to request him
without loss of time to meet her at Castle Delaval. Mrs. Seymour alone
folded Calantha to her bosom without one reproach, and, consigning her
with trembling anxiety to a father’s care, reminded him continually,
that she was his only remaining child, and that force, in a circumstance
of such moment, would be cruelty.




CHAPTER XII.


Lady Margaret insisted upon removing Calantha immediately, to London;
but Lord Avondale having heard from the Admiral the cause of her intended
departure, immediately declared his intention of quitting Ireland. Every
thing was now in readiness for his departure; the day fixed; the hour
at hand. It was not perhaps till Lord Avondale felt that he was going
to leave Calantha for ever, that he was fully sensible how much, and
how entirely his affections were engaged.

On the morning previous to his departure, Calantha threw the bracelet,
which Lady Margaret and her cousin had given her, from her arm; and,
weeping upon the bosom of Alice, bitterly lamented her fate, and informed
her friend that she never, never would belong to Buchanan.—Lord Avondale
had in vain sought an opportunity of seeing her one moment alone. He now
perceived the bracelet on the floor of the room she had just quitted; and
looking upon it, read, without being able to comprehend the application
of the inscription, “_Stessa sangue, Stessa sorte._”—He saw her at that
moment:—she was alone:—he followed her:—she fled from him, embarrassed
and agitated; but he soon approached her:—they fly so slowly who fly
from what they love.

Lord Avondale thought he had much to say—many things to ask:—he wished
to explain the feelings of his heart—to tell Calantha, once at least
before he quitted her, how deeply—how dearly he had loved,—how, though
unworthy in his own estimation of aspiring to her hand, the remembrance
of her should stimulate him to every noble exertion, and raise him to
a reputation which, without her influence, he never could attain:—he
thought that he could have clasped her to his bosom, and pressed upon her
lips the first kiss of love—the dearest, the truest pledge of fondness
and devotion. But, scarcely able to speak, confused and faultering, he
dared not approach her:—he saw one before him robed in purity, and more
than vestal innocence—one timidly fearful of even a look, or thought,
that breathed aught against that virtue which alone it worshipped.

“I am come,” he said, at length, “forgive my rashness, to restore
this bracelet, and myself to place it around your arms. Permit me to
say—farewell, before I leave you, perhaps for ever.” As he spoke, he
endeavoured to clasp the diamond lock;—his hand trembled;—Calantha started
from him. “Oh!” said she, “you know not what you do:—I am enough his
already:—be not you the person to devote me to him more completely:—do
not render me utterly miserable.” Though not entirely understanding her,
he scarcely could command himself. Her look, her manner—all told him too
certainly that which overcame his heart with delight.—“She loves me,” he
thought, “and I will die sooner than yield her to any human being:—she
loves me;” and, regardless of fears—of prudence—of every other feeling,
he pressed her one moment to his bosom. “Oh love me, Calantha,” was all
he had time to say; for she broke from him, and fled, too much agitated
to reply. That he had presumed too far, he feared; but that she was not
indifferent to him, he had heard and seen. The thought filled him with
hope, and rendered him callous to all that might befall him.

The Duke entered the room as Calantha quitted it.—“Avondale,” he said,
offering him his hand, “speak to me, for I wish much to converse with
you before we part:—all I ask is, that you will not deceive me. Something
more than common has taken place:—I observed you with my child.” “I must
indeed speak with you,” said Lord Avondale firmly, but with considerable
agitation. “Every thing I hold dear—my life—my happiness—depend on what I
have to say.” He then informed the Duke with sincerity of his attachment
for Calantha,—proud and eager to acknowledge it, even though he feared
that his hopes might never be realized.

“I am surprised and grieved,” said the Duke, “that a young man of your
high rank, fortune and rising fame, should thus madly throw away your
affections upon the only being perhaps who never must, never ought, to
return them. My daughter’s hand is promised to another. When I confess
this, do not mistake me:—No force will ever be made use of towards
her; her inclinations will at all times be consulted, even though she
should forget those of her parent; but she is now a mere child, and more
infantine and volatile withal, than it is possible for you to conceive.
There can be no necessity for her being now called upon to make a decided
choice. Buchanan is my nephew, and since the loss of my son, I have
centered all my hopes in him. He is heir to my name, as she is to my
fortune; and surely then an union between them, would be an event the
most desirable for me and for my family. But such considerations alone
would not influence me. I will tell you those then which operate in a
stronger manner:—I have given my solemn promise to my sister, that I will
do all in my power to assist in bringing about an event upon which her
heart is fixed. Judge then, if during her son’s absence, I can dispose
of Calantha’s hand, or permit her to see more of one, who has already,
I fear, made some impression upon her heart.”

Lord Avondale appeared much agitated.—The Duke paused—then
continued—“Granting that your attachment for my child is as strong as you
would have me believe—granting, my dear young friend, that, captivated by
your very superior abilities, manners and amiable disposition, she has
in part returned the sentiments you acknowledge in her favour,—cannot
you make her the sacrifice I require of you?—Yes.—Though you now think
otherwise, you can do it. So short an acquaintance with each other,
authorizes the term I use:—this is but a mere fancy, which absence and
strength of mind will soon overcome.”

Lord Avondale was proud even to a fault. He had listened to the Duke
without interrupting him; and the Duke continued to speak, because he
was afraid of hearing the answer, which he concluded would be made. For
protestations, menaces, entreaties he was prepared; but the respectful
silence which continued when he ceased, disconcerted him. “You are not
angry?” said he: “let us part in friendship:—do not go from me thus:—you
must forgive a father:—remember she is my child, and bound to me by
still dearer ties—she is my only one.” His voice faltered, as he said
this:—he thought of the son who had once divided his affections, and of
whom he seldom made mention since his loss.

Lord Avondale, touched by his manner and by his kindness, accepted his
hand, and struggling with pride—with love,—“I will obey your commands,”
he at length said, “and fly from her presence, if it be for her
happiness:—her happiness is the dearest object of my life. Yet let me see
her before I leave her.”—“No,” said the Duke, “it is too dangerous.” “If
this must not be,” said Lord Avondale, “at least tell her, that for her
sake, I have conquered even my own nature in relinquishing her hand, and,
with it every hope, but too strongly cherished by me. Tell her, that if I
do this, it is not because I do not feel for her the most passionate and
most unalterable attachment. I renounce her only, as I trust, to consign
her to a happier fate. You are her father:—you best know the affection
she deserves:—if she casts away a thought sometimes on me, let her not
suffer for the generosity and goodness of her heart:—let her not.”—He
would have said more, but he was too deeply affected to continue:—he
could not act, or dissemble:—he felt strongly, and he shewed it.




CHAPTER XIII.


After this conversation, Calantha saw no more of her lover: yet he was
very anxious to see her once again, and much and violently agitated
before he went. A few words which he had written to her he gave into
Mrs. Seymour’s own hands; and this letter, though it was such as to
justify the high opinion some had formed of his character, was but
little calculated to satisfy the expectations of Calantha’s absurdly
romantic mind; or to realize the hopes she had cherished. It was not
more expressive of his deep regret at their necessary separation, than
of his anxiety that she should not suffer her spirits to be depressed,
or irritate her father by an opposition which would prove fruitless.—“He
does not love you Calantha,” said Lady Margaret, with a malicious smile,
as soon as she had read the letter—(and every one would read it):—“when
men begin to speak of duty, they have ceased to love.” This remark gave
Calantha but little consolation. Lord Avondale had quitted her too,
without even bidding her farewell; and her thoughts continually dwelt
on this disappointment.

Calantha knew not then that her misery was more than shared,—that Lord
Avondale, though too proud to acknowledge it, was a prey to the deepest
grief upon her account,—that he lived but in the hope of possessing
the only being upon earth to whom he had attached himself,—and that the
sentence pronounced against both, was a death stroke to his happiness,
as well as to her own. When strong love awakes for the first time in an
inexperienced heart it is so diffident, so tremblingly fearful, that
it dares scarcely hope even for a return; and our own demerits appear
before us, in such exaggerated colours, and the superior excellence of
the object we worship arises so often to our view, that it seems but the
natural consequence of our own presumption, that we should be neglected
and forgotten.

Of Admiral Sir R. Mowbray, Calantha now took leave without being able
to utter one word:—she wept as children weep in early days, the hearts’
convulsive sob free and unrestrained. He was as much affected as herself,
and seeking Lady Margaret, before he left the castle and followed his
nephew who had gone straight to England, began an eager attack upon her,
with all the blunt asperity of his nature. Indeed he bitterly reproached
himself, and all those who had influenced him, in what he termed his
harsh unfeeling conduct to his nephew in this affair.—“And as to you,
madam,” he cried, addressing Lady Margaret, “you make two young people
wretched, to gratify the vanity of your son, and acquire a fortune,
which I would willingly yield to you, provided the dear children might
marry, and go home with me to Allanwater, a place as pretty, and far
more peaceful than any in these parts: there, I warrant, they would live
happy, and die innocent—which is more than most folks can say in these
great palaces and splendid castles.”

A smile of contempt was the only answer Lady Margaret deigned to give.—Sir
Richard continued, “you are all a mighty fine set of people, no doubt,
and your assemblies, and your balls are thronged and admired; but none of
these things will make the dear child happy, if her mind is set upon my
nephew; I am the last in the world to disparage any one; but my nephew
is just as proper a man in every point of view as your son; aye, or any
body’s son in the whole world; and so there is my mind given free and
hearty; for there is not a nobler fellow, and there never can be, than
Henry Avondale:—he is as brave a soldier as ever fought for his country;
and in what is he deficient?” Lady Margaret’s lips and cheeks were now
become livid and pale—a fatal symptom, as anger of that description in all
ages has led to evil deeds; whereas the scarlet effusion has, from the
most ancient times been accounted harmless. “Take Lady Calantha then,”
exclaimed Lady Margaret, with assumed calmness, while every furious
passion shook her frame; “and may she prove a serpent to your bosom,
and blast the peace of your whole family.” “She is an angel!” exclaimed
the Admiral, “and she will be our pride, and our comfort.” “She is a
woman,” returned Lady Margaret, with a malicious sneer; “and, by one
means or other, she will work her calling.” Calantha’s tears checked
Sir Richard’s anger; and, his carriage being in readiness, he left the
castle immediately after this conversation.




CHAPTER XIV.


It may easily be supposed that Lady Margaret Buchanan and Mrs. Seymour
had a most cordial dislike for each other. Happily, at present, they
agreed in one point: they were both desirous of rousing Calantha from
the state of despondency into which Lord Avondale’s departure had thrown
her. By both, she was admonished to look happy, and to restrain her
excessive grief. Mrs. Seymour spoke to her of duty and self control. Lady
Margaret sought to excite her ambition and desire of distinction. One
only subject was entirely excluded from conversation: Lord Avondale’s
name was forbidden to be mentioned in Calantha’s presence, and every
allusion to the past to be studiously avoided.

Lady Margaret, however, well aware that whosoever transgressed this
regulation would obtain full power over her niece’s heart, lost no
opportunity of thus gaining her confidence and affection.

Having won, by this artifice, an easy and favorable audience, after two
or three conversations upon the subject the most interesting to Calantha,
she began, by degrees, to introduce the name, and with the name such a
representation of the feelings of her son, as she well knew to be best
calculated to work upon the weakness of a female heart. Far different
were his real feelings, and far different his real conduct from that
which was described to her niece by Lady Margaret. She had written to
him a full account of all that had taken place; but his answer, which
arrived tardily, and, after much delay, had served only to increase that
lady’s ill humour and add to her disappointment. In the letter which
he sent to his mother he openly derided her advice; professed entire
indifference towards Calantha; and said that, indubitably, he could
not waste his thoughts or time in humouring the absurd fancies of a
capricious girl,—that Lord Avondale, or any other, were alike welcome to
her hand,—that, as for himself, the world was wide and contained women
enough for him; he could range amongst those frail and fickle charmers
without subjecting his honour and his liberty to their pleasure; and,
since the lady had already dispensed with the vows given and received at
an age when the heart was pure, he augured ill of her future conduct,
and envied not the happiness of the man it was her present fancy to
select:—he professed his intention of joining the army on the continent;
talked of leaden hail, glory and death! and seemed resolved not to lessen
the merit of any exploits he might achieve by any want of brilliancy in
the colouring and description of them.

Enraged at this answer, and sickening at his conceit, Lady Margaret sent
immediately to entreat, or rather to command, his return. In the mean
time, she talked much to Calantha of his sufferings and despair; and soon
perceiving how greatly the circumstance of Lord Avondale’s consenting
to part from her had wounded her feelings, and how perpetually she
recurred to it, she endeavoured, by the most artful interpretations of
his conduct, to lower him in her estimation. Sarcastically contrasting
his coldness with Buchanan’s enthusiasm: “Your lover,” said she, “is,
without doubt, most disinterested!—His eager desire for your happiness
is shown in every part of his conduct!—Such warmth—such delicacy! How
happy would a girl like my Calantha be with such a husband!—What filial
piety distinguishes the whole of his behaviour!—Obey your father, is
the burthen of his creed! He seems even to dread the warmth of your
affection!—He trembles when he thinks into what imprudence it may carry
you!—Why, he is a perfect model, is he not? But let me ask you, my
dear niece, is love, according to your notions and feelings, thus cool
and considerate?—does it pause to weigh right and duty?—is it so very
rational and contemplative?...” “Yes,” replied Calantha, somewhat piqued.
“Virtuous love can make sacrifices; but, when love is united with guilt,
it becomes selfish and thinks only of the present moment.” “And how, my
little philosopher, did you acquire so prematurely this wonderful insight
into the nature of love?” “By feeling it,” said Calantha, triumphantly;
“and by comparing my own feelings with what I have heard called by that
name in others.”

As she said this, her colour rose, and she fixed her animated blue eyes
full upon Lady Margaret’s face; but vainly did she endeavour to raise
emotion there; that countenance, steady and unruffled, betrayed not even a
momentary flash of anger: her large orbs rolled securely, as she returned
the glance, with a look of proud and scornful superiority. “My little
niece,” said she, tapping her gently on the head, and taking from her
clustering locks the comb that confined them, “my little friend is grown
quite a satirist, and all who have not had, like her, every advantage
of education, are to be severely lashed, I find, for the errors they
may inadvertently have committed.” As she spoke, tears started from her
eyes. Calantha threw herself upon her bosom. “O, my dear aunt,” she said,
“my dearest aunt, forgive me, I entreat you. God knows I have faults
enough myself, and it is not for me to judge of others, whose situation
may have been very different from mine. Is it possible that I should
have caused your tears? My words must, indeed, have been very bitter;
pray forgive me.” “Calantha,” said Lady Margaret, “you are already more
than forgiven; but the tears I shed were not occasioned by your last
speech; though it is true, censure from one’s children, or those one has
ever treated as such, is more galling than from others. But, indeed, my
spirits are much shaken. I have had letters from my son, and he seems
more hurt at your conduct than I expected:—he talks of renouncing his
country and his expectations; he says that, if indeed his Calantha, who
has been the constant object of his thoughts in absence, can have already
renounced her vows and him, he will never intrude his griefs upon her,
nor ever seek to bias her inclinations: yet it is with deep and lasting
regret that he consents to tear you from his remembrance and consign
you to another.”

Calantha signed deeply at this unexpected information. To condemn any one
to the pangs of unrequited love was hard: she had already felt that it was
no light suffering; and Lady Margaret, seeing how her false and artful
representations had worked upon the best feelings of an inexperienced
heart, lost no opportunity of improving and increasing their effect.

These repeated attempts to move Calantha to a determination, which was
held out to her as a virtuous and honourable sacrifice made to duty
and to justice, were not long before they were attended with success.
Urged on all sides continually, and worked upon by those she loved, she
at last yielded with becoming inconsistency; and one evening, when she
saw her father somewhat indisposed, she approached him, and whispered
in his ear, that she had thought better of her conduct, and would be
most happy in fulfilling his commands in every respect. “Now you are a
heroine, indeed,” said Lady Margaret, who had overheard the promise:
“you have shewn that true courage which I expected from you—you have
gained a victory over yourself, and I cannot but feel proud of you.”
“Aye,” thought Calantha, “flattery is the chain that will bind me; gild
it but bright enough, and be secure of its strength: you have found, at
last, the clue; now make use of it to my ruin.”

“She consents,” said Lady Margaret; “it is sufficient; let there be
no delay; let us dazzle her imagination, and awaken her ambition, and
gratify her vanity by the most splendid presents and preparations!”




CHAPTER XV.


Calantha’s jewels and costly attire—her equipages and attendants, were now
the constant topic of conversation. Every rich gift was ostentatiously
exhibited; while congratulations, were on all sides, poured forth, upon
the youthful bride. Lady Margaret, eagerly displaying the splendid store
to Calantha, asked her if she were not happy.—“Do not,” she replied
addressing her aunt, “do not fancy that I am weak enough to value these
baubles:—My heart at least is free from a folly like this:—I despise this
mockery of riches.” “You despise it!” repeated Lady Margaret, with an
incredulous smile:—“you despise grandeur and vanity! Child, believe one
who knows you well, you worship them; they are your idols; and while your
simple voice sings forth romantic praises of simplicity and retirement,
you have been cradled in luxury, and you cannot exist without it.”

Buchanan was now daily, nay even hourly expected:—Lady Margaret, awaited
him with anxious hope; Calantha with increasing fear. Having one morning
ridden out to divert her mind from the dreadful suspense under which she
laboured, and meeting with Sir Everard, she enquired of him respecting
her former favourite: “Miss Elinor,” said the doctor, “is still with
her aunt, the abbess of Glanaa; and, her noviciate being over, she will
soon, I fancy, take the veil. You cannot see her; but if your Ladyship
will step from your horse, and enter into my humble abode, I will shew
you a portrait of St. Clara, for so we now call her, she being indeed a
saint; and sure you will admire it.” Calantha accompanied the doctor, and
was struck with the singular beauty of the portrait. “Happy St. Clara,
she said, and sighed:—your heart, dedicated thus early to Heaven, will
escape the struggles and temptations to which mine is already exposed.
Oh! that I too, might follow your example; and, far from a world for
which I am not formed, pass my days in piety and peace.”

That evening, as the Duke of Altamonte led his daughter through the
crowded apartments, presenting her to every one previous to her marriage,
she was suddenly informed that Buchanan was arrived. Her forced spirits,
and assumed courage at once forsook her; she fled to her room; and
there giving vent to her real feelings, wept bitterly.—“Yet why should
I grieve thus?” she said:—“What though he be here to claim me? my hand
is yet free:—I will not give it against the feelings of my heart.”—Mrs.
Seymour had observed her precipitate flight, and following, insisted
upon being admitted. She endeavoured to calm her; but it was too late.

From that day, Calantha sickened:—the aid of the physician, and the
care of her friends were vain:—an alarming illness seized upon her mind,
and affected her whole frame. In the paroxysm of her fever, she called
repeatedly upon Lord Avondale’s name, which confirmed those around her
in the opinion they entertained, that her malady had been occasioned by
the violent effort she had made, and the continual dread under which
she had existed for some time past, of Buchanan’s return. Her father
bitterly reproached himself for his conduct; watched by her bed in anxious
suspense; and under the impression of the deepest alarm, wrote to his old
friend the admiral, informing him of his daughter’s danger, and imploring
him to urge Lord Avondale to forget what had passed and to hasten again
to Castle Delaval.—He stated that, to satisfy his sister’s ambition,
the greater part of his fortune should be settled upon Buchanan, to
whom his title descended; and if, after this arrangement, Lord Avondale
still continued the same as when he had parted from Calantha, he only
requested his forgiveness of his former apparent harshness, and earnestly
besought his return without a moment’s loss of time.

His sister, he strove in vain to appease:—Lady Margaret was in no temper
of mind to admit of his excuses. Her son had arrived and again left the
castle, without even seeing Calantha; and when the Duke attempted to
pacify Lady Margaret, she turned indignantly from him, declaring that
if he had the weakness to yield to the arts and stratagems of a spoiled
and wayward child, she would instantly depart from under his roof, and
never see him more. No one event could have grieved him so much, as this
open rupture with his sister. Yet his child’s continued danger turned
his thoughts from this, and every other consideration:—he yielded to her
wishes:—he could not endure the sight of her misery:—he had from infancy
never refused her slightest request:—and could he now, on so momentous
an occasion, could he now force her inclinations and constrain her choice.

The kind intentions of the Duke were however defeated. Stung to the soul,
Calantha would not hear of marriage with Lord Avondale:—pride, a far
stronger feeling than love, at that early period, disdained to receive
concessions even from a father:—and a certain moroseness began to mark
her character, as she slowly recovered from her illness, which never
had been observed in it before. She became austere and reserved; read
nothing but books of theology and controversy; seemed even to indulge
an inclination for a monastic life; was often with Miss St. Clare; and
estranged herself from all other society.

“Let her have her will,” said Lady Margaret, “it is the only means of
curing her of this new fancy.”—The Duke however thought otherwise: he
was greatly alarmed at the turn her disposition seemed to have taken,
and tried every means in his power to remedy and counteract it.—A year
passed thus away; and the names of Buchanan and Lord Avondale were
rarely or never mentioned at the castle; when one evening, suddenly and
unexpectedly, the latter appeared there to answer in person, a message
which the Duke had addressed to him, through the Admiral, during his
daughter’s illness.

Lord Avondale had been abroad since last he had parted from Calantha; he
had gained the approbation of the army in which he served; and what was
better, he knew that he deserved it. His uncle’s letter had reached him
when still upon service. He had acted upon the staff; he now returned
to join his own regiment which was quartered at Leitrim; and his first
care, before he proceeded upon the duties of his profession, was to seek
the Duke, and to claim, with diminished fortune and expectations, the
bride his early fancy had chosen.—“I will not marry him—I will not see
him:”—These were the only words Calantha pronounced, as they led her
into the room where he was conversing with her father.

When she saw him, however, her feelings changed. Every heart which has
ever known what it is to meet after a long estrangement, the object of
its first, of its sole, of its entire devotion, can picture to itself
the scene which followed. Neither pride, nor monastic vows, nor natural
bashfulness, repressed the full flow of her happiness at the moment,
when Lord Avondale rushed forward to embrace her, and calling her his
own Calantha, mingled his tears with hers.—The Duke, greatly affected,
looked upon them both. “Take her,” he said, addressing Lord Avondale, and
be assured, whatever her faults, she is my heart’s pride—my treasure. Be
kind to her:—that I know you will be, whilst the enthusiasm of passion
lasts: but ever be kind to her, even when it has subsided:—remember she
has yet to learn what it is to be controuled.” “She shall never learn
it,” said Lord Avondale, again embracing Calantha: “by day, by night, I
have lived but in this hope:—she shall never repent her choice.” “The God
of Heaven vouchsafe his blessing upon you,” said the Duke.—“My sister
may call this weakness; but the smile on my child’s countenance is a
sufficient reward.”




CHAPTER XVI.


What Lord Avondale had said was true.—One image had pursued him in every
change of situation, since he had parted from Calantha; and though he
had scarcely permitted his mind to dwell on hope; yet he felt that,
without her, there was no happiness for him on earth; and he thought that
once united to her, he was beyond the power of sorrow or misfortune.
So chaste, even in thought, she seemed—so frank and so affectionate,
could he be otherwise than happy with such a companion? How then was
he astonished, when, as soon as they were alone, she informed him that,
although she adored him, she was averse to the fetters he was so eager
to impose. How was he struck to find that all the chimerical, romantic
absurdities, which he most despised, were tenaciously cherished by her;
to be told that dear as he was, her freedom was even dearer; that she
thought it a crime to renounce her vows, her virgin vows; and that she
never would become a slave and a wife;—he must not expect it.

Unhappy Avondale! even such an avowal did not open his eyes, or deter him
from his pursuit. Love blinds the wisest: and fierce passion domineers
over reason. The dread of another separation inspired him with alarm.
Agitated—furious—he now combatted every objection, ventured every promise,
and loved even with greater fondness from the increasing dread of again
losing what he had hoped was already his own.—“Men of the world are
without religion,” said Calantha with tears; “Women of the world are
without principle. Truth is regarded by none. I love and honour my God,
even more than I love you; and truth is dearer to me than life. I am not
like those I see:—my education, my habits, my feelings are different;
I am like one uncivilized and savage; and if you place me in society,
you will have to blush every hour for the faults I shall involuntarily
commit. Besides this objection, my temper—I am more violent—Oh that it
were not so; but can I, ought I, to deceive you?”... “You are all that is
noble, frank and generous: you shall guide me,” said Lord Avondale; “and
I will protect you. Be mine:—fear me not:—your principles, I venerate;
your religion I will study—will learn—will believe in.—What more?”

Lord Avondale sought, and won that strange uncertain being, for whom he
was about to sacrifice so much. He considered not the lengthened journey
of life—the varied scenes through which they were to pass; where all
the qualities in which she was wholly deficient would be so often and
so absolutely required—discretion, prudence, firm and steady principle,
obedience, humility.—But to all her confessions and remonstrances, he
replied:—“I love, and you return my passion:—can we be otherwise than
blest! You are the dearest object of my affection, my life, my hope,
my joy. If you can live without me, which I do not believe, I cannot
without you; and that is sufficient. Sorrows must come on all; but united
together we can brave them.—My Calantha you torture me, but to try me.
Were I to renounce you—were I to take you at your word, you, you would
be the first to regret and to reproach me.”—“It is but the name of wife
I hate,” replied the spoiled and wayward child.—“I must command:—my
will.”—“Your will, shall be my law,” said Lord Avondale, as he knelt
before her: “you shall be my mistress—my guide—my monitress—and I, a
willing slave.”—So spoke the man, who, like the girl he addressed, had
died sooner than have yielded up his freedom, or his independence to
another; who, high and proud, had no conception of even the slightest
interference with his conduct or opposition to his wishes; and who at
the very moment that in words he yielded up his liberty, sought only
the fulfilment of his own desire, and the attainment of an object upon
which he had fixed his mind.

The day arrived. A trembling bride, and an impassioned lover faintly
articulated the awful vow. Lord Avondale thought himself the happiest of
men; and Calantha, though miserable at the moment, felt that, on earth,
she loved but him. In the presence of her assembled family, they uttered
the solemn engagement, which bound them through existence to each other;
and though Calantha was deeply affected, she did not regret the sacred
promise she had made.

When Lord Avondale, however, approached to take her from her father’s
arms—when she heard that the carriages awaited, which were to bear them
to another residence, nor love, nor force prevailed. “This is my home,”
she cried: “these are my parents. Share all I have—dwell with me where
I have ever dwelt; but think not that I can quit them thus. No spirit
of coquetry—no petty airs, learned or imagined, suggested this violent
and reiterated exclamation—I will not go.” I will not—was sufficient
as she imagined, to change the most determined character; and when she
found that force was opposed to her violence, terror, nay abhorrence
took possession of her mind; and it was with shrieks of despair she was
torn from her father’s bosom.

“Unhappy Avondale!” said Sophia, as she saw her thus borne away, “may
that violent spirit grow tame, and tractable, and may Calantha at length
prove worthy of such a husband!” This exclamation was uttered with a
feeling which mere interest for her cousin could not have created. In
very truth, Sophia loved Lord Avondale. And Alice MacAllain, who heard the
prayer with surprise and indignation, added fervently:—“that he may make
her happy—that he may know the value of the treasure he possesses—this
is all I ask of heaven.—Oh! my mistress—my protectress—my Calantha—what
is there left me on earth to love, now thou art gone? Whatever they may
say of thy errors even those errors are dearer to my heart, than all
the virtues thou has left behind.”




CHAPTER XVII.


It was at Allanwater, a small villa amidst the mountains, in the county
of Leitrim, that Lord and Lady Avondale passed the first months of
their marriage. This estate had been settled upon Sir Richard Mowbray,
during his lifetime, by his brother, the late Earl of Avondale. It was
cheerful, though retired; and to Calantha’s enchanted eyes, appeared
all that was most romantic and beautiful upon earth. What indeed had not
appeared beautiful to her in the company of the man she loved! Every one
fancies that there exists in the object of their peculiar admiration a
superiority over others. Calantha perhaps was fully justified in this
opinion. Lord Avondale displayed even in his countenance the sensibility
of a warm, ardent and generous character. He had a distinguished and
prepossessing manner, entirely free from all affectation. It is seldom
that this can be said of any man, and more seldom of one possessed of
such singular beauty of person. He appeared indeed wholly to forget
himself; and was ever more eager in the interests of others than his
own. Many there are, who, though endowed with the best understandings,
have yet an inertness, an insensibility to all that is brilliant and
accomplished; and who, though correct in their observations, yet fatigue
in the long intercourse of life by the sameness of their thoughts. Lord
Avondale’s understanding, however, fraught as it was with knowledge,
was illumined by the splendid light of genius, yet not overthrown by its
force. Of his mind, it might be truly said, that it did not cherish one
base, one doubtful or worldly feeling. He was so sincere that, even in
conversation, he never mis-stated, or exaggerated a fact. He saw at a
glance the faults of others; but his extreme good nature and benevolence
prevented his taking umbrage at them. He was, it is true, of a hot and
passionate temper, and if once justly offended, firm in his resolve,
and not very readily appeased; but he was too generous to injure or to
hate even those who might deserve it. When he loved, and he never really
loved but one, it was with so violent, so blind a passion, that he might
be said to doat upon the very errors of the girl to whom he was thus
attached. To the society of women he had been early accustomed; but had
suffered too much from their arts, and felt too often the effects of their
caprices, to be easily made again their dupe and instrument. Of beauty
he had ofttimes been the willing slave. Strong passion, opportunity,
and entire liberty of conduct, had, at an early period, thrown him into
its power. His profession, and the general laxity of morals, prevented
his viewing his former conduct in the light in which it appeared to his
astonished bride; but when she sighed, because she feared that she was
not the first who had subdued his affections, he smilingly assured her,
that she should be the last—that no other should ever be dear to him
again.

Calantha, in manner, in appearance, in every feeling, was but a child.
At one hour, she would look entranced upon Avondale, and breath vows of
love and tenderness; at another, hide from his gaze, and weep for the
home she had left. At one time she would talk with him and laugh from
the excess of gaiety she felt; at another, she would stamp her foot
upon the ground in a fit of childish impatience, and exclaiming, “You
must not contradict me in any thing,” she would menace to return to her
father, and never see him more.

If Lord Avondale had a defect, it was too great good nature, so that
he suffered his vain and frivolous partner, to command, and guide, and
arrange all things around him, as she pleased, nor foresaw the consequence
of her imprudence, though too often carried to excess. With all his
knowledge, he knew not how to restrain; and he had not the experience
necessary to guide one of her character:—he could only idolize; he left
it to others to censure and admonish.

It was also for Calantha’s misfortune, that Lord Avondale’s religious
opinions were different from those in which she had been early educated.
It was perhaps to shew him the utility of stricter doctrines, both of
faith and morality, that heaven permitted one so good and noble, as he
was, to be united with one so frail and weak. Those doctrines which he
loved to discuss, and support in speculation, she eagerly seized upon, and
carried into practice; thus proving to him too clearly, their dangerous
and pernicious tendency. Eager to oppose and conquer those opinions in
his wife, which savoured as he thought of bigotry and prudish reserve, he
tore the veil at once from her eyes, and opened hastily her wondering mind
to a world before unknown. He foresaw not the peril to which he exposed
her:—he heeded not the rapid progress of her thoughts—the boundless
views of an over-heated imagination. At first she shrunk with pain and
horror, from every feeling which to her mind appeared less chaste, less
pure, than those to which she had long been accustomed; but when her
principles, or rather her prejudices, yielded to the power of love, she
broke from a restraint too rigid, into a liberty the most dangerous from
its novelty, its wildness and its uncertainty.

The monastic severity which she had imposed upon herself, from exaggerated
sentiments of piety and devotion, gave way with the rest of her former
maxims.—She knew not where to pause, or rest; her eyes were dazzled,
her understanding bewildered; and she viewed the world, and the new form
which it wore before her, with strange and unknown feelings, which she
could neither define, nor command.

Before this period, her eyes had never even glanced upon the numerous
pages which have unfortunately been traced by the hand of profaneness and
impurity; even the more innocent fictions of romance had been withheld
from her; and her mother’s precepts had, in this respect, been attended
to by her with sacred care. Books of every description were now, without
advice, without selection, thrown open before her; horror and astonishment
at first retarded the course of curiosity and interest:—Lord Avondale
smiled; and soon the alarm of innocence was converted into admiration
at the wit, and beauty with which some of these works abounded. Care
is taken when the blind are cured, that the strong light of day should
not fall too suddenly upon the eye; but no caution was observed in at
once removing from Calantha’s mind, the shackles, the superstitions,
the reserve, the restrictions which overstrained notions of purity and
piety had imposed.

Calantha’s lover had become her master; and he could not tear himself
one moment from his pupil. He laughed at every artless or shrewd remark,
and pleased himself with contemplating the first workings of a mind,
not unapt in learning, though till then exclusively wrapt up in the
mysteries of religion, the feats of heroes, the poetry of classic bards,
and the history of nations the most ancient and the most removed.—“Where
have you existed, my Calantha?” he continually said:—“who have been
your companions?” “I had none,” she replied; “but wherever I heard of
cruelty, vice, or irreligion, I turned away.” “Ah, do so still, my best
beloved,” said Lord Avondale, with a sigh. “Be ever as chaste, as frank,
as innocent, as now.” “I cannot,” said Calantha, confused and grieved. “I
thought it the greatest of all crimes to love:—no ceremony of marriage—no
doctrines, men have invented, can quiet my conscience:—I know no longer
what to believe, or what to doubt:—hide me in your bosom:—let us live
far from a world which you say is full of evil:—and never part from
my side; for you are—Henry you are, all that is left me now. I look no
more for the protection of Heaven, or the guidance of parents;—you are
my only hope:—do you preserve and bless me; for I have left every thing
for you.”




CHAPTER XVIII.


There is nothing so difficult to describe as happiness. Whether some
feeling of envy enters into the mind upon hearing of it, or whether it is
so calm, so unassuming, so little ostentatious in itself, that words give
an imperfect idea of it, I know not. It is easier to enjoy it, than to
define it. It springs in the heart, and shews itself on the countenance;
but it shuns all display; and is oftener found at home, when home has
not been embittered by dissensions, suspicions and guilt, than any where
else upon earth. Yes, it is in home and in those who watch there for us.
Miserable is the being, who turns elsewhere for consolation! Desolate
is the heart which has broken the ties that bound it there.

Calantha was happy; her home was blessed; and in Lord Avondale’s society
every hour brought her joy. Perhaps the feelings which, at this time
united them, were too violent—too tumultuous. Few can bear to be thus
loved—thus indulged: very few minds are strong enough to resist it.
Calantha was utterly enervated by it; and when the cares of life first
aroused Lord Avondale, and called him from her, she found herself unfit
for the new situation she was immediately required to fill. When for a few
hours he left her, she waited with trembling anxiety for his return; and
though she murmured not at the necessary change, her days were spent in
tears, and her nights in restless agitation. He more than shared in her
distress: he even encouraged the excess of sensibility which gave rise
to it; for men, whilst they love, think every new caprice and weakness
in the object of it but a new charm; and whilst Calantha could make him
grave or merry—or angry or pleased, just as it suited her, he pardoned
every omission—he forgave every fault.

Used to be indulged and obeyed, she was not surprised to find him a
willing slave; but she had no conception that the chains he now permitted
to be laid upon him, were ever to be broken; and tears and smiles, she
thought, must, at all times, have the power over his heart which they
now possessed. She was not mistaken:—Lord Avondale was of too fine a
character to trifle with the affections he had won; and Calantha had too
much sense and spirit to wrong him. He looked to his home therefore for
comfort and enjoyment. He folded to his bosom the only being upon earth,
for whom he felt one sentiment of passion or of love. Calantha had not
a thought that he did not know, and share: his heart was as entirely
open, as her own.

Was it possible to be more happy? It was; and that blessing too, was
granted. Lady Avondale became a mother:—She gave to Avondale, the dearest
gift a wife can offer—a boy, lovely in all the grace of childhood—whose
rosy smiles, and whose infant caresses, seemed even more than ever to
unite them together. He was dear to both; but they were far dearer to
each other. At Allenwater, in the fine evenings of summer, they wandered
out upon the mountains, and saw not in the countenance of the villagers
half the tenderness and happiness they felt themselves. They uttered
therefore no exclamations upon the superior joy of honest industry:—a
cottage offered nothing to their view, which could excite either envy or
regret:—they gave to all, and were loved by all; but in all respects they
felt themselves as innocent, and more happy than those who surrounded
them.

In truth, the greater refinement, the greater polish the mind and manner
receive, the more exquisite must be the enjoyment the heart is capable
of obtaining. Few know how to love:—it is a word which many misuse; but
they who have felt it, know that there is nothing to compare with it
upon earth. It cannot however exist if in union with guilt. If ever it
do spring up in a perverted heart, it constitutes the misery that heart
deserves:—it consumes and tortures, till it expires. Even, however,
when lawful and virtuous, it may be too violent:—it may render those
who are subject to it, negligent of other duties, and careless of other
affections: this in some measure was the case of Lord and Lady Avondale.

From Allenwater, Lord and Lady Avondale proceeded to Monteith, an estate
of Lord Avondale’s, where his Aunt Lady Mowbray and his only sister Lady
Elizabeth Mowbray resided. Sir Richard and Lady Mowbray had never had
any children, but Elizabeth and Lord Avondale were as dear to them, and
perhaps dearer than if they had been their own. The society at Monteith
was large. There pleasure and gaiety and talent were chiefly prised and
sought after, while a strong party spirit prevailed. Lady Monteith, a
woman of an acute and penetrating mind, had warmly espoused the cause
of the ministry of the day. Possessed of every quality that could most
delight in society,—brilliant, beautiful and of a truly masculine
understanding, she was accurate in judgment, and at a glance could
penetrate the secrets of others; yet was she easily herself deceived.
She had a nobleness of mind which the intercourse with the world and
exposure to every temptation, had not been able to destroy. Bigotted
and prejudiced in opinions which early habit had consecrated, she was
sometimes too severe in her censures of others.

At Castle Delaval, the society was even too refined; and a slight tinge
of affectation might, by those who were inclined to censure, be imputed
to it. Though ease was not wanting, there was a polish in manner, perhaps
in thought, which removed the general tone somewhat too far from the
simplicity of nature; sentiment, and all the romance of virtue, was
encouraged.

At Monteith, on the contrary, this over refinement was the constant
topic of ridicule. Every thought was there uttered, and every feeling
expressed:—there was neither shyness, nor reserve, nor affectation. Talent
opposed itself to talent with all the force of argument.—The loud laugh
that pointed out any new folly, or hailed any new occasion of mirth, was
different from the subdued smile, and gentle hint to which Calantha had
been accustomed. Opinions were there liberally discussed; characters
stripped of their pretences; and satire mingled with the good humour,
and jovial mirth, which on every side abounded.

She heard and saw every thing with surprise; and though she loved and
admired the individuals, she felt herself unfit to live among them. There
was a liberality of opinion and a satiric turn which she could not at
once comprehend; and she said to herself, daily, as she considered those
around her—“They are different from me.—I can never assimilate myself
to them: I was every thing in my own family; and I am nothing here.”
What talents she had, were of a sort they could not appreciate; and all
the defects were those which they most despised. The refinement, the
romance, the sentiment she had imbibed, appeared in their eyes assumed
and unnatural; her strict opinions perfectly ridiculous; her enthusiasm
absolute insanity; and the violence of her temper, if contradicted
or opposed, the pettishness of a spoiled and wayward child. Yet too
indulgent, too kind to reject her, they loved her, they caressed her,
they bore with her petulance and mistakes. It was, however, as a child
they considered her:—they treated her as one not arrived at maturity of
judgment.

Her reason by degrees became convinced by the arguments which she
continually heard; and all that was spoken at random, she treasured up
as truth: even whilst vehemently contending and disputing in defence of
her favourite tenets, she became of another opinion. So dangerous is
a little knowledge—so unstable is violence. Her soul’s immortal hopes
seemed to be shaken by the unguarded jests of the profane, who casually
visited at Monteith, or whom she met with elsewhere:—she read till she
confounded truth and falsehood, nor knew any longer what to believe:—she
heard folly censured till she took it to be criminal; but crime she saw
tolerated if well concealed. The names she had set in her very heart
as pure and spotless, she heard traduced and vilified:—indignantly she
defended them with all the warmth of ardent youth:—they were proved
guilty; she wept in agony, she loved them not less, but she thought less
favourably of those who had undeceived her.

The change in Calantha’s mind was constant—was daily: it never ceased—it
never paused; and none marked its progress, or checked her career. In
emancipating herself from much that was no doubt useless, she stripped
herself by degrees of all, till she neither feared, nor cared, nor knew
any longer what was, from what was not.

Nothing gives greater umbrage than a misconception and mistaken
application of tenets and opinions which were never meant to be thus
understood and acted upon. Lady Mowbray, a strict adherent to all customs
and etiquettes, saw with astonishment in Calantha a total disregard of
them; and her high temper could ill brook such a defect. Accustomed to the
gentleness of Elizabeth, she saw with indignation the liberty her niece
had assumed. It was not for her to check her; but rigidity, vehemence
in dispute, and harsh truths, at times too bitterly expressed on both
sides, gave an appearance of disunion between them, which happily was
very far from being real, as Calantha loved and admired Lady Mowbray
with the warmest affection.

Lord Avondale, in the mean time, solely devoted to his wife, blinded
himself to her danger. He saw not the change a few months had made, or
he imputed it alone to her enthusiasm for himself. He thought others
harsh to what he regarded as the mere thoughtlessness of youth; and,
surrendering himself wholly to her guidance, he chided, caressed and
laughed with her in turn. “I see how it is Henry,” said Sir Richard,
before he left Ireland,—“you are a lost man; I shall leave you another
year to amuse yourself; and I fancy by that time all this nonsense will
be over. I love you the better for it, however, my dear boy;—a soldier
never looks so well, to my mind, as when kneeling to a pretty woman,
provided he does his duty abroad, as well as at home, and that praise
every one must give you.”




CHAPTER XIX.


The threatening storm of rebellion now darkened around.—Acts of daily
rapine and outrage alarmed the inhabitants of Ireland, both in the
capital and in the country: all the military forces were increased;
Lord Avondale’s regiment, then at Leitrim, was ordered out on actual
service; and the business of his profession employed every moment of his
time. The vigorous measures pursued, soon produced a favorable change;
tranquillity was apparently restored; and the face of things resumed
its former appearance; but the individual minds that had been aroused
to action were not so easily quieted, and the charms of an active life
were not so readily laid aside. Lord Avondale was still much abroad—much
occupied; and the time hanging heavy upon Calantha’s hands, she was not
sorry to hear that they were going to spend the ensuing winter in London.

In the autumn, previous to their departure for England, they passed a
few weeks at Castle Delaval, chiefly for the purpose of meeting Lady
Margaret Buchanan who had till then studiously avoided every occasion
of meeting Lady Avondale. Buchanan had neither seen her nor sent her
one soothing message since that event, so angry he affected to be, at
what, in reality, gave him the sincerest delight.

Count Gondimar had returned from Italy, and was now at the castle. He
had brought letters from Viviani to Lady Margaret, who said at once when
she had read them: “You wish to deceive me. These letters are dated
from Naples, but our young friend is here—here even in Ireland.” “And
his vengeance,” said Gondimar, laughing. Lady Margaret affected, also,
to smile:—“Oh, his vengeance!” she said, “is yet to come:—save me from
his love now; and I will defend myself from the rest.”

Lord and Lady Dartford were, likewise, at the castle. He appeared
cold and careless. In his pretty inoffensive wife, he found not those
attractions, those splendid talents which had enthralled him for so long
a period with Lady Margaret. He still pined for the tyranny of caprice,
provided the load of responsibility and exertion were removed: and the
price of his slavery were that exemption from the petty cares of life,
for which he felt an insurmountable disgust. From indolence, it seemed
he had fallen again into the snare which was spread for his ruin; and
having, a second time, submitted to the chain, he had lost all desire
of ever again attempting to shake it. Lady Dartford, too innocent to see
her danger, lamented the coldness of her husband, and loved him with even
fonder attachment, for the doubt she entertained of his affection. She
was spoken of by all with pity and praise: her conduct was considered as
examplary, when, in fact, it was purely the effect of nature; for every
hope of her heart was centered in one object, and the fervent constancy
of her affection arose, perhaps, in some measure from the uncertainty
of its being returned. Lady Margaret continued to see the young Count
Viviani in secret:—he had now been in Ireland for some months:—his
manner to Lady Margaret was, however, totally changed:—he had accosted
her, upon his arrival, with the most distant civility, the most studied
coldness:—he affected ever that marked indifference which proved him
but still too much in her power; and, while his heart burned with the
scorching flames of jealousy, he waited for some opportunity of venting
his desire of vengeance, which, from its magnitude, might effectually
satisfy his rage.

Lord Dartford saw him once as he was retiring in haste from Lady
Margaret’s apartment; and he enquired of her eagerly who he was.—“A young
musician, a friend of Gondimar’s, an Italian,” said Lady Margaret. “He
has not an Italian countenance,” said Lord Dartford, thoughtfully. “I
wish I had not seen him:—it is a face which makes a deep and even an
unpleasant impression. You call him Viviani, do you?—whilst I live, I
never shall forget Viviani!”

Cards, billiards and music, were the usual nightly occupations. Sir
Everard St. Clare and the Count Gondimar sometimes entered into the
most tedious and vehement political disputes, unless when Calantha
could influence the latter enough to make him sing, which he did in
an agreeable, though not in an unaffected manner. At these times,
Mrs. Seymour, with Sophia and Frances, unheeding either the noise or
the gaiety, eternally embroidered fancy muslins, or, with persevering
industry, painted upon velvet. Calantha mocked at these innocent
recreations. “Unlike music, drawing and reading, which fill the mind,”
she said;—“unlike even to dancing which, though accounted an absurd mode
of passing away time, is active and appears natural to the human form
and constitution.”

“Tell me Avondale,” Calantha would say, “can any thing be more tedious
than that incessant irritation of the fingers—that plebian, thrifty and
useless mode of increasing in women a love of dress—a selfish desire
of adorning their own persons?—I ever loathed it.—There is a sort
of self-satisfaction about these ingenious working ladies, which is
perfectly disgusting. It gratifies all the little errors of a narrow
mind, under the appearance of a notable and domestic turn. At times,
when every feeling of the heart should have been called forth, I have
seen Sophia examining the patterns of a new gown, and curiously noting
every fold of a strangers dress. Because a woman who, like a mechanic,
has turned her understanding, and hopes, and energies, into this course,
remains uninjured by the storms around her, is she to be admired?—must
she be exalted?” “It is not their occupation, but their character, you
censure:—I fear, Calantha, it is their very virtue you despise.” “Oh no!”
she replied, indignantly: “when real virtue, struggling with temptations
of which these senseless, passionless creatures have no conception,
clinging for support to Heaven, yet preserves itself uncorrupted amidst
the vicious and the base, it deserves a crown of glory, and the praise and
admiration of every heart. Not so these spiritless immaculate prejudiced
sticklers for propriety. I do not love Sophia:—no, though she ever affords
me a cold extenuation for my faults—though through life she considers me
as a sort of friend whom fate has imposed upon her through the ties of
consanguinity. I did not—could not—cannot love her; but there are some,
far better than herself, noble ardent characters, unsullied by a taint
of evil; and I think, Avondale, without flattery, you are in the list,
that I would die to save; that I would bear every torture and ignominy,
to support and render happy.”—“Try then my Calantha,” said Lord Avondale,
“to render them so; for, believe me, there is no agony so great as to
remember that we have caused one moment’s pang to such as have been kind
and good to us.” “You are right,” said Calantha, looking upon him with
affection.

Oh! if there be a pang of heart too terrible to endure and to imagine,
it would be the consideration that we have returned unexampled kindness,
by ingratitude, and betrayed the generous noble confidence that trusted
every thing to our honour and our love. Calantha had not, however,
this heavy charge to answer for at the time in which she spoke, and her
thoughts were gay, and all those around seemed to share in the happiness
she felt.

Lord Avondale one day reproved Calantha for her excessive love of
music.—“You have censured work,” he said, “imputed to it every evil, the
cold and the passionless can fall into:—I now retort your satire upon
music.” Some may smile at this; but had not Lord Avondale’s observation
more weight than at first it may appear. Lady Avondale often rode to
Glanaa to hear Miss St. Clare sing. Gondimar sung not like her; and
his love breathing ditties went not to the heart, like the hymns of the
lovely recluse. But for the deep flushes which now and then overspread
St. Clare’s cheeks, and the fire which at times animated her bright dark
eye, some might have fancied her a being of a purer nature than our
own—one incapable of feeling any of the fierce passions that disturb
mankind; but her voice was such as to shake every fibre of the heart,
and might soon have betrayed to an experienced observer the empassioned
violence of her real character.

Sir Everard, who had one day accompanied Calantha to the convent, asked
his niece in a half serious, half jesting manner, concerning her gift
of prophecy. “Have not all this praying and fasting, cured you of it,
my little Sybel?” he said.—“No,” replied the girl; “but that which you
are so proud of, makes me sad:—it is this alone which keeps me from the
sports which delight my companions:—it is this which makes me weep when
the sun shines bright in the clear heavens, and the bosom of the sea
is calm.”—“Will you shew us a specimen of your art?” said Sir Everard,
eagerly.—Miss St. Clare coloured, and smiling archly at him, “The
inspiration is not on me now, uncle,” she said; “when it is, I will send
and let you know.”—Calantha embraced her, and returned from her visit
more and more enchanted with her singular acquaintance.




CHAPTER XX.


As soon as Lord and Lady Avondale had quitted Castle Delaval, they
returned to Allanwater, previous to their departure for England. Buchanan,
as if to mark his still-continued resentment against Calantha, arrived at
Castle Delaval, accompanied by some of his London acquaintance almost as
soon as she had quitted it. He soon distinguished himself in that circle
by his bold libertine manners, his daring opinions and his overbearing
temper. He declared himself at utter enmity with all refinement, and
professed his distaste for what is termed good society. It was not long,
however, before Lady Margaret observed a strange and sudden alteration
in her son’s manners and deportment:—he entered into every amusement
proposed; he became more than usually condescending; and Alice Mac
Allain, it was supposed, was the sole cause of his reform.

Alice was credulous; and when she was first told that she was as fair as
the opening rose, and soft and balmy as the summer breeze, she listened
with delight to the flattering strain, and looked in the mirror to see
if all she heard, were true. She beheld there a face, lovely as youth
and glowing health could paint it, dimpling with ever-varying smiles,
while hair, like threads of gold, curled in untaught ringlets over eyes
of the lightest blue; and when she heard that she was loved, she could
not bring herself to mistrust those vows which her own bosom was but
too well prepared to receive. She had, perhaps, been won by the first
who had attempted to gain her affections; but she fell into hands where
falsehood had twined itself around the very heart’s core:—she learned
to love in no common school, and one by one every principle and every
thought was perverted; but it was not Buchanan who had to answer for
her fall! She sunk into infamy, it is true, and ruin irreparable; but
she passed through all the glowing course of passion and romance; nor
awoke, till too late, from the dream which had deluded her.

Her old father, Gerald Mac Allain, had, with the Duke’s permission,
promised her hand in marriage to a young man in the neighbourhood, much
esteemed for his good character. Linden had long considered himself as
an approved suitor. When, therefore, he was first informed of the change
which had occurred in her sentiments, and, more than all, when he was
told with every aggravation of her misconduct and duplicity, he listened
to the charge with incredulity, until the report of it was confirmed from
her own lips, by an avowal, that she thought herself no longer worthy
of accepting his generous offer,—that to be plain, she loved another,
and wished never more to see him, or to hear the reproaches which she
acknowledged were her due. “I will offer you no reproaches,” said Linden,
in the only interview he had with her; “but remember, Miss Mac Allain,
when I am far away, that if ever those who, under the name of friend,
have beguiled and misled you, should prove false and fail you,—remember,
that whilst Linden lives, there is one left who would gladly lay down
his life to defend and preserve you, and who, being forced to quit you,
never will reproach you: no, Alice—never.”

“Gerald,” said Lady Margaret, on the morning when Alice was sent in
disgrace from the castle, “I will have no private communication between
yourself and your daughter. She will be placed at present in a respectable
family; and her future conduct will decide in what manner she will be
disposed of hereafter.” The old man bent to the ground in silent grief;
for the sins of children rise up in judgment against their parents. “Oh
let me not be sent from hence in disgrace,” said the weeping girl; “drive
me not to the commission of crime.—I am yet innocent.—Pardon a first
offence.” “Talk not of innocence,” said Lady Margaret, sternly: “those
guilty looks betray you.—Your nocturnal rambles, your daily visits to
the western cliff, your altered manner,—all have been observed by me
and Buchanan”—“Oh say not, at least, that he accuses me. Whatever my
crime, I am guiltless, at least, towards him.” “Guiltless or not, you
must quit our family immediately; and to-morrow, at an early hour, see
that you are prepared.”

It was to Sir Everard’s house that Alice was conveyed. There were many
reasons which rendered this abode more convenient to Lady Margaret than
any other. The Doctor was timid and subservient, and Count Gondimar was
already a great favourite of the youngest daughter, so that the whole
family were in some measure, in Lady Margaret’s power. Her ladyship
accordingly insisted upon conveying Alice, herself, to Lady St. Clare’s
house; and having safely lodged her in her new apartment, returned to
the castle, in haste, and appeared at dinner, pleased with her morning’s
adventure; her beauty more radiant from success.

It is said that nothing gives a brighter glow to the complexion, or
makes the eyes of a beautiful woman sparkle so intensely, as triumph
over another. Is this, however, the case with respect to women alone?
Buchanan’s florid cheek was dimpled with smiles; no sleepless night had
dimmed the lustre of his eye; he talked incessantly, and with unusual
affability addressed himself to all, except to his mother; while a look
of gratified vanity was observable whenever the absence of Alice was
alluded to. He had been pleased with being the cause of ruin to any
woman; but his next dearest gratification was the having it supposed that
he was so. He was much attacked upon this occasion, and much laughing
and whispering was heard. The sufferings of love are esteemed lightly
till they are felt; and there were, on this occasion, few at the Duke’s
table, if any, who had ever really known them.




CHAPTER XXI.


Time which passes swiftly and thoughtlessly for the rich and the gay,
treads ever with leaden foot, for those who are miserable and deserted.
Bright prospects carry the thoughts onward; but for the mourning heart,
it is the direct reverse:—it lives on the memory of the past; traces
ever the same dull round; and loses itself in vain regrets, and useless
retrospections. No joyous morn now rose to break the slumbers of the
once innocent and happy Alice: peace of mind was gone, like the lover
who had first won her affections only, it seemed, to abandon her to
shame and remorse.

At Sir Everard’s, Alice was treated with impertinent curiosity, tedious
advice and unwise severity. “I hate people in the clouds,” cried the
Doctor, as he led her to her new apartment. “Who would walk in a stubble
field with their eyes gazing upon the stars?—You would perhaps, and then
let me say, nobody would pity you, Miss, if you tumbled into the mire.”
“But kind people would help me up again, and the unkind alone would mock
at me, and pass on.” “There are so many misfortunes in this life, Miss Mac
Allain, which come unexpectedly upon us, that, for my life, I have not
a tear to spare for those who bring them on themselves.” “Yet, perhaps,
sir, they are of all others, the most unfortunate.” “Miss Alice, mark
me, I cannot enter into arguments, or rather shall not, for we do not
always think proper to do what we can. Conscious rectitude is certainly
a valuable feeling, and I am anxious to preserve it now: therefore, as I
have taken charge of you, Miss, which is not what I am particularly fond
of doing, I must execute what I think my duty. Please then to give over
weeping, as it is a thing in a woman which never excites commiseration
in me. Women and children cry out of spite: I have noticed them by the
hour: therefore, dry your eyes; think less of love, more of your duty;
and recollect that people who step out of their sphere are apt to tumble
downwards till the end of their days, as nothing is so disagreeable as
presumption in a woman. I hate presumption, do I not Lady St. Clare?
So no more heroics, young Miss,” continued he, smiling triumphantly,
and shaking his head:—“no more heroics, if you value my opinion. I hate
romance and fooleries in women: do I not, Lady St. Clare?—and heaven be
praised, since the absence of my poor mad brother, we have not a grain
of it in our house. We are all downright people, not afraid of being
called vulgar, because we are of the old school; and when you have lived
a little time with us, Miss, we shall, I hope, teach you a little sound
common sense—a very valuable commodity let me tell you, though you fine
people hold it in disrepute.”

In this manner, Miss Mac Allain’s mornings were spent, and her evenings
even more tediously; for the Doctor, alarmed at the republican principles
which he observed fast spreading, was constantly employed in writing
pamphlets in favour of government, which he read aloud to his family,
when not at the castle, before he committed them to the Dublin press.
Two weeks were thus passed, by Alice, with resignation; a third, it
seems was beyond her endurance; for one morning Sir Everard’s daughters
entering in haste, informed their father and mother that she was gone.
“Gone,” cried Lady St. Clare! “the thing is impossible.” “Gone,” cried
Sir Everard! “and where? and how?” The maids were called, and one Charley
Wright, who served for footman, coachman and every thing else upon
occasion, was dispatched to seek her, while the doctor without waiting
to hear his wife’s surmises, or his daughter’s lamentations, seized his
hat and stick and walked in haste to the castle.

His body erect, his cane still under his arm, the brogue stronger than
ever from inward agitation, he immediately addressed himself to the Duke
and Lady Margaret and soon converted their smiles into fear and anger,
by informing them that Alice Mac Allain had eloped.

Orders were given, that every enquiry should be made for the fugitive; and
the company at the castle being informed one by one of the event, lost
themselves in conjectures upon it. Lady Margaret had no doubt herself,
that her son was deeply implicated in the affair, and in consequence
every search was set on foot, but, as it proved in the event, without
the least success. Mr. Buchanan had left Castle Delaval the week before,
which confirmed the suspicions already entertained on his account.

Lady Avondale was in London when she was informed of this event. Her
grief for Alice’s fate was very sincere, and her anxiety for her even
greater; but Lord Avondale participated in her sorrow—he endeavoured to
sooth her agitation; and how could he fail in his attempt: even misery
is lightened, if it is shared; and one look, one word, from a heart
which seems to comprehend our suffering, alleviates the bitterness.

Though Lady Avondale had not seen Buchanan since her marriage, and had
heard that he was offended with her, she wrote to him immediately upon
hearing of Alice’s fate, and urged him by every tie, she thought most
sacred and dear—by every impression most likely to awaken his compassion,
to restore the unfortunate girl to her suffering father, or at least to
confide her, to her care, that she might if possible protect and save
her from further misfortune.—To her extreme astonishment, she received
an answer to this letter with a positive assurance from him that he
had no concern, whatever in Miss Mac Allain’s departure; that he was
as ignorant as herself, whither she could be gone; and that it might be
recollected he had left Castle Delaval some days previous to that event.

Lady Dartford who had returned to London and sometimes corresponded with
Sophia, now corroborated Buchanan’s statement, and assured her that she
had no reason to believe Buchanan concerned in this dark affair, as she
had seen him several times and he utterly denied it. Lady Dartford was
however too innocent, and inexperienced to know how men of the world can
deceive; she was even ignorant of her husband’s conduct; and though she
liked not Lady Margaret, she doubted not that she was her friend:—who
indeed doubts till they learn by bitter experience the weakness of
confiding!




CHAPTER XXII.


The whole party, at Castle Delaval, now proceeded to London for the
winter, where Lord and Lady Avondale were already established in the
Duke’s mansion in .... Square.

A slight cold and fever, added to the anxiety and grief Lady Avondale
had felt for her unhappy friend, had confined her entirely to her own
apartment; and since her arrival in town, Count Gondimar was almost the
only person who had been hitherto admitted to her presence.

He and Viviani now lodged in the same house; but the latter still
concealed himself and never was admitted to Lady Margaret’s presence
except secretly and with caution. He often enquired after Calantha; and
one evening the following conversation took place respecting her between
himself and the Count:

“You remember her,” said Gondimar, “a wild and wayward girl. Is she
less, do you suppose, an object of attraction now in the more endearing
character of mother and of wife—so gentle, so young she seems, so pure,
and yet so passionately attached to her husband and infant boy, that I
think even you Viviani would feel convinced of her integrity. She seems
indeed one born alone to love, and to be loved, if love itself might exist
in a creature whom purity, and every modest feeling seem continually to
surround.”

Viviani smiled in scorn. “Gondimar, this Calantha, this fair and spotless
flower is a woman, and, as such, she must be frail. Besides, I know
that she is so in a thousand instances, though as yet too innocent to
see her danger, or to mistrust our sex. You have often described to me
her excessive fondness for music. What think you of it? She does not
hear it as the Miss Seymours hear it, you tell me. She does not admire
it, as one of the lovers of harmony might. Oh no; she feels it in her
very soul—it awakens every sensibility—it plays upon the chords of her
overheated imagination—it fills her eyes with tears, and strengthens
and excites the passions, which it appears to soothe and to compose.
There is nothing which the power of music cannot effect, when it is thus
heard. Your Calantha feels it to a dangerous excess. Let me see her,
and I will sing to her till the chaste veil of every modest feeling is
thrown aside, and thoughts of fire dart into her bosom, and loosen every
principle therein. Oh I would trust every thing to the power of melody.
Calantha is fond of dancing too, I hear; and dancing is the order of the
night. This is well; and once, though she saw me not amidst the crowd,
I marked her, as she lightly bounded the gayest in the circle, from the
mere excess of the animal spirits of youth. Now Miss Seymour dances; but
it is with modest dignity: her sister Frances dances also, and it is with
much skill and grace, her sidelong glance searching for admiration as
she passes by; but Calantha sees not, thinks not, when she dances:—her
heart beats with joyous pleasure—her countenance irradiates—and almost
wild with delight, she forgets every thing but the moment she enjoys. Let
Viviani but for one night be her partner, and you shall see how pure is
this Calantha. She boasts too of the most unclouded happiness, you tell
me, and of the most perfect state of security and bliss; they who soar
above others, on the wings of romance, will fall. Oh surely they will
fall. Let her but continue in her present illusion a few short years—let
her but take the common chances of the life she will be called upon to
lead; and you, or I, or any man, may possess her affections, nor boast
greatly of the conquest. In one word, she is now in London. Give but
Viviani one opportunity of beholding her: it is all I ask.”

Gondimar listened to his young friend with regret. “There are women
enough, Viviani,” he said mournfully; “spare this one. I have an interest
in her safety.”—“I shall not seek her,” replied Viviani proudly: “please
your own fancy: I care not for these triflers—not I.”




CHAPTER XXIII.


To that heartless mass of affectation, to that compound of every new and
every old absurdity, to that subservient spiritless world of fashion,
Lady Avondale was now for the first time introduced. It burst at once
upon her delighted view, like a new paradise of unenjoyed sweets—like
a fairy kingdom peopled with ideal inhabitants. Whilst she resided at
Monteith and Castle Delaval, she had felt an eager desire to improve her
mind; study of every sort was her delight, for he who instructed her was
her lover—her husband; one smile, from him could awaken every energy—one
frown, repress every feeling of gaiety, for every word he uttered amused
and pleased; she learned with more aptness than a school-boy; and he who
wondered at the quickness of his pupil, forgot to ascribe her exertions
and success to the power which alone occasioned them—a power which
conquers every difficulty and endures every trial.

Arrived in that gay city, that fair mart where pleasure and amusement
gather around their votaries,—where incessant hurry after novelty employs
every energy, and desire of gaiety fills every hour, every feeling
and every thought, Calantha hailed every new acquaintance—every new
amusement; and her mind unpolished and ignorant, opened with admiration
and wonder upon so new, so diversified a scene. To the language of praise
and affection, she had been used; to unlimited indulgence and liberty,
she was accustomed; but the soft breathing voice of flattery, sounded
to her ear far sweeter, than any other more familiar strain; though
often, in the midst of its blandishments, she turned away to seek for
Lord Avondale’s approbation.

Calantha was happy before; but now it was like a dream of enchantment;
and her only regret was that her husband seemed not to partake as much,
as she could have wished in her delight. Yet he knew the innocence of
her heart, the austerity with which she shrunk from the bare thought
of evil; and he had trusted her even in the lion’s den, so certain
was he of her virtue, and attachment. Indeed, Lord Avondale, though
neither puffed with vanity, nor overbearing with pride, could not but
be conscious, as he looked around, that both in beauty of person, in
nobility of parentage, and more than these, in the impassioned feelings
of an uncorrupted heart, and the rich gifts of a mind enlightened by
wisdom and study,—none were his superiors, and very few his equals;
and if his Calantha could have preferred the effeminate and frivolous
beings who surrounded her, to his sincere and strong attachment, would
she be worthy, in such case, of a single sigh of regret or the smallest
struggle to retain her!—No:—he was convinced that she would not; and,
as in word and deed, he was faithful to her, he feared not to let her
take the course which others trod, or enjoy the smiles of fortune, while
youth and happiness were in her possession.

The steed that never has felt the curb, as it flies lightly and wildly
proud of its liberty among its native hills and valleys, may toss its
head and plunge as it snuffs the air and rejoices in its existence,
while the tame and goaded hack trots along the beaten road, starting
from the lash under which it trembles and stumbling and falling, if
not constantly upheld.—Now see the goal before her. Calantha starts for
the race. Nor curb, nor rein have ever fettered the pupil of nature—the
proud, the daring votress of liberty and love. What though she quit the
common path, if honour and praise accompany her steps, and crown her with
success, shall he who owns her despise her? or must he, can he, mistrust
her? He did not; and the high spirits of uncurbed youth were in future
her only guide—the gayest therefore, where all were gay—the kindest, for
excess of happiness renders every heart kind. In a few months after Lady
Avondale’s arrival in London, she was surrounded, as it appeared, by
friends who would have sacrificed their lives and fortunes to give her
pleasure. Friends!—it was a name she was in the habit of giving to the
first who happened to please her fancy. This even was not required: the
frowns of the world were sufficient to endear the objects it censures to
her affection; and they who had not a friend, and deserved not to have
one, were sure, without other recommendation to find one in Calantha.
All looked fresh, beautiful and new to her eyes; every person she met
appeared kind, honourable and sincere; and every party brilliant; for
her heart, blest in itself reflected its own sunshine around.

Mrs. Seymour, after her arrival in town was pleased to see Calantha
so happy. No gloomy fear obtruded itself; she saw all things with the
unclouded eye of virtue; yet when she considered how many faults, how
many imprudences, her thoughtless spirits might lead her to commit,
she trembled for her; and once when Calantha boasted of the extacy she
enjoyed—“long may that innocent heart feel thus,” she said, “my only,
my beloved niece; but whilst the little bark is decked with flowers, and
sails gaily in a tranquil sea, steer it steadily, remembering that rough
gales may come and we should ever be prepared.” She spoke with an air
of melancholy: she had perhaps, herself, suffered from the goodness and
openness of her heart; but whatever the faults and sorrows into which
she had fallen, no purer mind ever existed than hers—no heart ever felt
more strongly.

The affectation of generosity is common; the reality is so rare, that its
constant and silent course passes along unperceived, whilst prodigality
and ostentation bear away the praise of mankind.—Calantha was esteemed
generous; yet indifference for what others valued, and thoughtless
profusion were the only qualities she possessed. It is true that the
sufferings of others melted a young and ardent heart into the performance
of many actions which would never have occurred to those of a colder
and more prudent nature. But was there any self-denial practised; and
was not she, who bestowed, possessed of every luxury and comfort, her
varying and fanciful caprices could desire! Never did she resist the
smallest impulse or temptation. If to give had been a crime, she had
committed it; for it gave her pain to refuse, and she knew not how to
deprive herself of any gratification. She lavished, therefore, all she
had, regardless of every consequence; but happily for her, she was placed
in a situation which prevented her from suffering as severely for her
faults, as probably she deserved.

Two friends now appeared to bless her further, as she thought, by their
affection and confidence—Lady Mandeville, and Lady Augusta Selwyn. The
former she loved; the latter she admired. Lord Avondale observed her
intimacy with Lady Mandeville with regret; and once, though with much
gentleness, reproved her for it. “Henry,” she replied, “say not one word
against my beautiful, though perhaps unfortunate friend: spare Lady
Mandeville; and I will give you up Lady Augusta Selwyn; but remember
the former is unprotected and unhappy.”

Mrs. Seymour was present when Lord Avondale had thus ventured to hint his
disapprobation of Calantha’s new acquaintance.—“Say at once, that Calantha
shall not see any more of one whom you disapprove:—her own character
is not established. Grace and manner are prepossessing qualities; but
it is decorum and a rational adherence to propriety which alone can
secure esteem. Tell me not of misfortunes,” continued Mrs. Seymour, with
increasing zeal in the good cause, and turning from Lord Avondale to
Calantha. “A woman who breaks through the lesser rules which custom and
public opinion have established, deserves to lose all claim to respect;
and they who shrink not at your age, from even the appearance of guilt,
because they dread being called severe and prudish, too generally follow
the steps of the victims their false sentiments of pity have induced
them to support. Lord Avondale” continued she, with more of warmth than
it was her custom to shew—“you will lament, when it is too late, the
ruin of this child. Those who now smile at Calantha’s follies will soon
be the first to frown upon her faults. She is on the road to perdition;
and now is the moment, the only moment perhaps, in which to check her
course. You advise:—I command. My girls at least, shall not associate
with Lady Mandeville, whom no one visits. Lady Avondale of course is
her own mistress.”

Piqued at Mrs. Seymour’s manner, Calantha appealed to her husband: “and
shall I give up my friend, because she has none but me to defend her?
Shall my friendship—” “Alas Calantha,” said Lord Avondale, “you treat
the noblest sentiment of the heart as a toy which is to be purchased
to-day, and thrown aside to-morrow. Believe me, friendship is not to be
acquired by a few morning visits; nor is it to be found, though I fear
it is too often lost, in the crowd of fashion.” He spoke this mournfully.
The ready tears trembled in Lady Avondale’s eyes.—“I will see no more of
her, if it gives you pain. I will never visit her again.”—Lord Avondale
could not bear to grieve her.

A servant entered with a note, whilst they were yet together:—a crimson
blush suffused Calantha’s cheeks. “I see” said Lord Avondale smiling,
as if fearful of losing her confidence,—“it is from your new friend.”
It was so:—she had sent her carriage with a request that Lady Avondale
would immediately call upon her.—She hesitated; looked eagerly for a
permission, which was too soon granted; and, without making any excuse,
for she had not yet learned the art, she hastened from the lowering eyes
of the deeply offended Mrs. Seymour.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Long as she had now been known to Lady Mandeville, she had only once
before seen her at her own house. She now found her reclining upon a sofa
in an apartment more prettily than magnificently ornamented:—a shawl was
thrown gracefully over her; and her hair, in dark auburn ringlets, half
concealed her languishing blue eyes. Lady Mandeville was at this time no
longer in the very prime of youth. Her air and manner had not that high
polish, which at first sight seduces and wins. On the contrary, it rather
was the reverse, and a certain pedantry took off much from the charm of
her conversation. Yet something there was about her, which attracted.
She seemed sincere too, and had less of that studied self-satisfied air,
than most women, who affect to be well informed.

“I am glad you are come, my loved friend,” she said, extending her hand
to Calantha when she entered. “I have just been translating an Ode of
Pindar:—his poetry is sublime: it nerves the soul and raises it above
vulgar cares;—but you do not understand Greek, do you? Indeed to you it
would be a superfluous acquisition, married as you are, and to such a
man.”—Lady Avondale, rather puzzled as to the connection between domestic
happiness, and the Greek language, listened for further explanation;—but
with a deep sigh, her lovely acquaintance talked of her fate, and referred
to scenes and times long passed, and utterly unknown to her. She talked
much too of injured innocence, of the malignity of the world, of her
contempt for her own sex, and of the superiority of men.

Children as fair, and more innocent than their mother, entered whilst she
was yet venting her complaints. A husband she had not;—but lovers. What
man was there who could see her, and not, at all events wish himself of
the number! Yet she assured Lady Avondale, who believed her, that she
despised them all; that moreover she was miserable, but vicious; that
her very openness and frankness ought to prove that there was nothing to
conceal. The thought of guilt entered not at that time into Calantha’s
heart; and when a woman affirmed that she was innocent, it excited in
her no other surprise, than that she should, for one moment, suppose her
so barbarous, and so malevolent, as to think otherwise. Indeed there
seemed to her as great a gulph between those she loved, and vice, as
that which separates the two extremes of wickedness and virtue; nor had
she yet learned to comprehend the language of hypocrisy and deceit.

Though the presence of the children had not made any difference, the
entrance of three gentlemen, whom Lady Mandeville introduced to Lady
Avondale, as her lovers, gave a new turn to the conversation; and here it
should be explained, that the term lover, when Lady Mandeville used it,
was intended to convey no other idea than that of an humble attendant,—a
bearer of shawls, a writer of sonnets, and a caller of carriages. “With
Lord Dallas you are already acquainted,” she said, sighing gently. “I
wish now to introduce to you Mr. Clarendon, a poet: and Mr. Tremore, what
are you? speak for yourself; for I hardly know in what manner to describe
you.” “I am anything, and everything that Lady Mandeville pleases,” said
Mr. Tremore, bowing to the ground, and smiling languidly upon her. Mr.
Tremore was one of the most unsightly lovers that ever aspired to bear
the name. He was of a huge circumference, and what is unusual in persons
of that make, he was a mass of rancour and malevolence—gifted however
with a wit so keen and deadly, that with its razor edge, he cut to the
heart most of his enemies, and all his friends. Lord Dallas, diminutive
and conceited, had a brilliant wit, spoke seldom, and studied deeply
every sentence which he uttered. He affected to be absent; but in fact
no one ever forgot himself so seldom. His voice, untuned and harsh,
repeated with a forced emphasis certain jests and bon mots which had been
previously made, and adapted for certain conversations. Mr. Clarendon
alone seemed gifted with every kind of merit:—he had an open ingenuous
countenance, expressive eyes, and a strong and powerful mind.

The conversation alternately touched upon the nature of love, the use
and beauty of the greek language, the pleasures of maternal affection,
and the insipidity of all English society. It was rather metaphorical
at times:—there was generally in it a want of nature—an attempt at
display: but to Calantha it appeared too singular, and too attractive to
wish it otherwise. She had been used, however, to a manner rather more
refined—more highly polished than any she found out of her own circle
and family. A thousand things shocked her at first, which afterwards
she not only tolerated, but adopted. There was a want of ease, too, in
many societies, to which she could not yet accustom herself; and she
knew not exactly what it was which chilled and depressed her when in
the presence of many who were, upon a nearer acquaintance, amiable and
agreeable. Perhaps too anxious a desire to please, too great a regard
for trifles, a sort of selfishness, which never loses sight of its own
identity, occasions this coldness among these votaries of fashion. The
dread of not having that air, that dress, that refinement which they
value so much, prevents their obtaining it; and a degree of vulgarity
steals unperceived amidst the higher classes in England, from the very
apprehension they feel of falling into it. Even those, who are natural,
do not entirely appear so.

Calantha’s life was like a feverish dream:—so crowded, so varied, so
swift in its transitions, that she had little time to reflect; and when
she did, the memory of the past was so agreeable and so brilliant, that
it gave her pleasure to think of it again and again. If Lord Avondale
was with her, every place appeared even more than usually delightful;
but, when absent, her letters, no longer filled with lamentations on
her lonely situation, breathed from a vain heart the lightness, and
satisfaction it enjoyed.

It may be supposed that one so frivolous and so thoughtless, committed
every possible fault and folly which opportunity and time allowed. It
may also be supposed, that such imprudence met with its just reward;
and that every tongue was busy in its censure, and every gossip in
exaggerating the extraordinary feats of such a trifler. Yet Calantha,
upon the whole, was treated with only too much kindness; and the world,
though sometimes called severe, seemed willing to pause ere it would
condemn, and was intent alone to spare—to reclaim a young offender.




CHAPTER XXV.


How different from the animated discussion at Lady Mandeville’s, was the
loud laugh and boisterous tone of Lady Augusta Selwyn, whom Calantha
found, on her return, at that very moment stepping from her carriage,
and enquiring for her. “Ah, my dear sweet friend,” she cried, flying
towards Calantha, and shaking her painfully by the hand, “this fortuitous
concurrence of atoms, fills my soul with rapture. But I was resolved to
see you. I have promised and vowed three things in your name; therefore,
consider me as your sponsor, and indeed I am old enough to be such.
In the first place, you must come to me to-night, for I have a little
supper, and all my guests attend only in the hope of meeting you. You
are the bribe I have held out—you are to stand me in lieu of a good
house, good cook, agreeable husband, and pretty face,—in all of which I
am most unfortunately deficient. Having confessed thus much, it would
be barbarous, it would be inhuman you know to refuse me. Now for the
second favour,” continued this energetic lady:—“come alone; for though I
have a great respect for Mrs. and Miss Seymour, yet I never know what I
am about when their very sensible eyes are fixed upon me.”—“Oh you need
not fear, Sophia would not come if I wished it; and Mrs. Seymour”—“I
have something else to suggest,” interrupted Lady Augusta:—“introduce
me immediately to your husband: he is divine, I hear—perfectly divine!”
“I cannot at this moment; but”—“By the bye, why were you not at the ball
last night. I can tell you there were some who expected you there. Yes,
I assure you, a pair of languid blue eyes watching for you—a fascinating
new friend waiting to take you home to a _petit souper très-bien assorti_.
I went myself. It was monstrously dull at the ball:—insupportable, I
assure you; perfectly so. Mrs. Turner and her nine daughters! It is quite
a public calamity, Mrs. Turner being so very prolific—the produce so
frightful. Amongst other animals, when they commit such blunders, the
brood is drowned; but we christians are suffered to grow up till the
land is overrun.” “Heigho.” “What is the matter? You look so _triste_
to-day, not even my wit can enliven you.—Isn’t it well, love? or has
its husband been plaguing it? Now I have it:—you have, perchance, been
translating an Ode of Pindar. I was there myself this morning; and it
gave me the vapours for ten minutes; but I am used to these things you
know child, and you are a novice. By the bye, where is your cousin,
_le beau capitaine, le chef des brigands_? I was quite frappè with his
appearance.” “You may think it strange,” said Calantha, “but I have not
seen him these eight years—not since he was quite a child.” “Oh, what
an interview there will be then,” said Lady Augusta: “he is a perfect
ruffian.”

“Are you aware that we have three sets of men now much in request?—There
are these ruffians, who affect to be desperate, who game, who drink,
who fight, who will captivate you, I am sure of it. They are always just
going to be destroyed, or rather talk as if they were; and every thing
they do, they must do it to desperation. Then come the exquisites. Lord
Dallas is one, a sort of refined _petit maître_, quite thorough bred,
though full of conceit. As to the third set, your useful men, who know
how to read and write, in which class critics, reviewers, politicians
and poets stand, you may always know them by their slovenly appearance.
But you are freezing, _mon enfant_. What can be the matter? I will
release you in a moment from my visitation. I have ten thousand things to
say.—Will you come to my opera box Tuesday? Are you going to the masked
ball Thursday? Has Mrs. Churchill sent for you to her _déjeûné paré_.
I know she wishes, more than I can express, to have you. Perhaps you
will let me drive you there. My ponies are beautiful arabians: have you
seen them? Oh, by the bye, why were you not at your aunt Lady Margaret’s
concert? I believe it was a concert:—there was a melancholy noise in
one of the rooms; but I did not attend to it.—Do you like music?”—“I
do; but I must own I am not one who profess to be all enchantment at
the scraping of a fiddle, because some old philharmonic plays on it;
nor can I admire the gurgling and groaning of a number of foreigners,
because it is called singing.”

“They tell me you think of nothing but love and poetry. I dare say
you write sonnets to the moon—the chaste moon, and your husband. How
sentimental!” “And you,”—“No, my dear, I thank heaven I never could
make a rhyme in my life.—Farewell—adieu—remember to-night,—bring Lord
Avondale—that divine Henry: though beware too; for many a lady has to
mourn the loss of her husband, as soon as she has introduced him into
the society of _fascinating_ friends.” “He is out of town.” “Then so
much the better. After all, a wife is only pleasant when her husband
is out of the way. She must either be in love, or out of love with him.
If the latter, they wrangle; and if the former, it is ten times worse.
Lovers are at all times insufferable; but when the holy laws of matrimony
give them a lawful right to be so amazingly fond and affectionate,
it makes one sick.” “Which are you, in love or out of love with Mr.
Selwyn?”—“Neither, my child, neither. He never molests me, never intrudes
his dear dull personage on my society. He is the best of his race, and
only married me out of pure benevolence. We were fourteen raw Scotch
girls—all hideous, and no chance of being got rid of, either by marriage,
or death—so healthy and ugly. I believe we are all alive and flourishing
somewhere or other now. Think then of dear good Mr. Selwyn, who took me
for his mate, because I let him play at cards whenever he pleased. He
is so fond of cheating, he never can get any one but me to play with
him. Farewell.—_Au revoir._—I shall expect you at ten.—_Adieu, chère
petite._” Saying which Lady Augusta left Calantha.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Calantha imagined, and was repeatedly assured, that her husband neglected
her: the thought gave her pain: she contrasted his apparent coldness and
gravity with the kindness and flattery of others. Even Count Gondimar was
more anxious for her safety, and latterly she observed that he watched
her with increasing solicitude. At a masked ball, in particular, the
Italian Count followed her till she was half offended. “Why do you thus
persecute me as to the frivolity and vanity of my manner? Why do you
seem so infinitely more solicitous concerning me than my husband and my
relations?” she said, suddenly turning and looking earnestly at him. “What
is it to you with whom I may chance to converse? How is it possible that
you can see imperfections in me, when others tell me I am faultless and
delightful?” “And do you believe that the gay troop of flatterers who
now follow you,” said a mask, who was standing near the Count, “do you
believe that they feel any other sentiment for you than indifference?”
“Indifference!” repeated Calantha, “what can you mean? I am secure of
their affection; and I have found more friends in London since I first
arrived there, than I have made in the whole previous course of my life.”
“You are their jest and their derision,” said the same mask.—“Am I,” she
said, turning eagerly round to her partner, Lord Trelawny, “am I your
jest, and your derision?” “You are all that is amiable and adorable,”
he whispered. “Speak louder,” said Lady Avondale, “tell this Italian
Count, and his discourteous friend, what you think of me; or will they
wait to hear, what we all think of them.” Gondimar, offended, left her;
and she passed the night at the ball; but felt uneasy at what she had
said.

Monteagle house, at which the masquerade was given, was large and
magnificent. The folding doors opened into fine apartments, each decorated
with flowers, and filled with masks. Her young friends, Sophia and Lady
Dartford, in the first bloom and freshness of youth, attracted much
admiration. Their dress was alike, and while seeming simplicity was
its greatest charm, every fold, every turn was adapted to exhibit their
figure, and add to their natural grace. If vanity can give happiness to
the heart, how must theirs have exulted; for encomium and flattery was
the only language they heard.

Lady Avondale, in the mean time, fatigued with the ceremonious insipidity
of their conversation, and delighted at having for once escaped from
Count Gondimar, sought in vain to draw her companions into the illuminated
gardens, and not succeeding, wandered into them alone, followed by some
masks in the disguise of gipsies, by whom she was soon surrounded; and
one of them whom she now recognised to be the same who had spoken to her
with Gondimar, now under the pretence of telling her fortune, said to
her every thing that was most severe. “What,” said he, turning to one
of his companions, “do you think of the line in this lady’s hand? It is
a very strange one: I augur no good from it.” The dress of the mask who
spoke was that of a friar, his voice was soft and mournful. “Caprice”
said the young man, whom he addressed: “I read no worse fault. Come,
I will tell her fortune.—Lady, you were born under a favoured planet,”
“Aaron,”—interrupted the first gipsey, “you are a flatterer, and it is
my privilege to speak without disguise. Give me the hand, and I will
shew her destiny.” After pausing a moment, he fixed his dark eyes upon
Calantha, the rest of his face being covered by a cowl, and in a voice
like music, so soft and plaintive begun.—

     The task to tell thy fate, be mine,
     To guard against its ills, be thine;
     For heavy treads the foot of care
     On those who are so young and fair.

     The star, that on thy birth shone bright,
     Now casts a dim uncertain light:
     A threatening sky obscures its rays,
     And shadows o’er thy future days.

     In fashion’s magic circle bound,
     Thy steps shall tread her mazy round,
     While pleasure, flattery and art,
     Shall captivate thy fickle heart.

     The transient favorite of a day,
     Of folly and of fools the prey;
     Insatiate vanity shall pine
     As honour, and as health decline,
     Till reft of fame, without a friend,
     Thou’lt meet, unwept, an early end.

Lady Avondale coloured; and the young man who had accused her of caprice,
watching her countenance, and seeing the pain these acrimonious lines
had given her, reproved the friar “No, no,” he cried “if she must hear
her destiny, let me reveal it.”

       The task to tell thy fate, be mine,
       And every bliss I wish thee, thine.
     So heavenly fair, so pure, so blest,
       Admired by all, by all carest.
     The ills of life thou ne’er shalt know,
     Or weep alone for others woe.

“For the honour of our tribe, cease Aaron” said a female gipsey advancing:
“positively I will not hear any more of this flat parody. The friar’s
malice I could endure; but this will mar all.”—Whatever the female
gipsey might say, Aaron had a certain figure, and countenance which were
sufficiently commanding and attractive. He had disengaged himself from
his companions; and now approached Calantha, and asked her to allow him
to take care of her through the crowd. “This is abominable treachery,”
said the female gipsey:—“this conduct is unpardonable: good faith and
good fellowship were ever our characteristics.” “You should not exert
your power” answered the young man, “against those who seem so little
willing to use the same weapons in return. I will answer for it that,
though under a thousand masks, the lady you have attacked, would never
say an ill natured thing” “Take care of her goodnature then,” said the
gipsey archly:—“it may be more fatal.”

The gipsey then went off, with the rest of her party; but Aaron remained,
and, as if much pleased with the gentleness of Lady Avondale’s behaviour,
followed her. “Who are you?” said she. “I will not take the arm of one
who is ashamed of his name”—“And yet it is only thus unknown, I can
hope to find favour.” “Did I ever see you before?” “I have often had
the happiness of seeing you:—but am I then really so altered?” said
he turning to her, and looking full in her face, “that you cannot even
guess my name?” “Had I ever beheld you before,” answered Lady Avondale,
“I could not have forgotten it.” He bowed with a look of conceit, and
Lady Avondale coloured at his comprehending the compliment, she had
sufficiently intended to make. Smiling at her confusion, he assured her
he had a right to her attention—“_Stesso sangue, Stessa sorte_”—said he
in a low voice.

Calantha could hardly believe it possible:—the words he pronounced were
those inscribed on her bracelet. “And are you my cousin?” said she: “is
it indeed so? no: I cannot believe it.” Buchanan bowed again. “Yes,”
said he; “and a pretty cousin you have proved yourself to me. I had
vowed never to forgive you; but you are much too lovely and too dear
for me to wish to keep my oath.” A thousand remembrances now crowded on
her mind—the days of her infancy—the amusements and occupations of her
childhood; and she looked vainly in Buchanan’s face, for the smallest
traces of the boy she had known so well. Delighted with her evening’s
adventure, and solely occupied with her companion, the masquerade, the
heat and all other annoyances were forgotten, till Lady Dartford being
fatigued, entreated her to retire.

She had conversed during the greater part of the evening with Lord
Dartford. The female gipsey to whose party he belonged, and who had
attacked Lady Avondale, was Lady Margaret Buchanan. He had asked Lady
Dartford many questions about himself, to all of which she had answered
with a reserve that had pleased him, and with a praise so unaffected, so
heartfelt, and so little deserved, that he could not but deeply feel his
own demerit. He did not make himself known, but suffered Lady Margaret
to rally and torment his unoffending wife; asking her repeatedly, why so
pretty, and so young, Lord Dartford permitted her to go to a masquerade
without a protector. “It is,” replied Lady Dartford innocently, “that he
dislikes this sort of amusement, and knows well, that those who appear
unprotected, are sure of finding friends.” At this speech Lady Margaret
laughed prodigiously; and turning to the Friar, who, much disguised,
still followed her, asked him, if he had never seen Lord Dartford at a
masquerade, giving it as her opinion, that he was very fond of this sort
of amusement, and was probably there at that very moment.

In the mean time, Calantha continued to talk with Buchanan, and eagerly
enquired of him who it was who, thus disguised, had with so much acrimony
attacked her. “I do not know the young man,” he answered:—“my mother
calls him Viviani:—he is much with her; but he ever wears a disguise, I
think; for no one sees him; and, except Gondimar, he seems not to have
another acquaintance in England.”

It has been said that the weak-minded are alone attracted by the eye;
and they who say this, best know what they mean. To Calantha it appeared
that the eye was given her for no other purpose than to admire all that
was fair and beautiful. Certain it is, she made that use of her’s; and
whether the object of such admiration was man, woman, or child, horse or
flower, if excellent in its kind, she ever gave them the trifling homage
of her approbation. Her new-found cousin was therefore hailed by her
with the most encouraging smile; and how long she might have listened
to the account he was giving her of his exploits, is unknown, had not
Frances approached her in a hasty manner, and said, “Do come away:—the
strangest thing possible has happened to me:—Lord Trelawney has proposed
to me, and I—I have accepted his offer.” “Accepted his offer!” Calantha
exclaimed, with a look of horror. “Oh, pray, keep my secret till we get
home,” said Frances. “I dare not tell Sophia; but you must break it to
my mother.”

Lord Trelawney was a silly florid young man, who laughed very heartily and
good humouredly, without the least reason. He wore the dress, and had been
received in that class of men, whom Lady Augusta called the exquisites.
He had professed the most extravagant adoration for Lady Avondale, so
that she was quite astonished at his having attached himself so suddenly
to Frances; but not being of a jealous turn, she wished her joy most
cordially, and when she did the same by him,—“Could not help what I’ve
done,” he said, looking tenderly at her through a spying-glass:—“total
dearth of something else to say:—can never affection her much:—but she’s
your cousin, you know:”—and then he laughed.

Lady Avondale prevailed on Frances to keep this important secret from her
mother till morning, as that good lady had not long been in bed, and to
arouse her with such unexpected news at five o’clock had been cruel and
useless. The next morning, long before Lady Avondale had arisen, every
one knew the secret; and very soon after, preparations for the marriage
were made. The young bride received presents and congratulations: her
spirits were exuberant; and her lover, perfect and delightful. Even Lady
Avondale beheld him with new eyes, and the whole family, whenever he was
mentioned, spoke of him as a remarkably sensible young man, extremely
well informed, and possessed of every quality best adapted to ensure
the happiness of domestic life.




CHAPTER XXVII.


From the night of the masquerade, Lady Avondale dared hardly confess to
herself, how entirely she found her thoughts engrossed by Buchanan. She
met him again at a ball. He entreated her to let him call on her the
ensuing day:—he said he had much to tell her:—his manner was peculiar;
and his eyes, though not full of meaning in general, had a certain look
of interest that gratified the vainest of human hearts. “I shall be
at home till two,” said Calantha. “I shall be with you at twelve,” he
answered.—Late as the hour of rest might appear to some, Calantha was
up, and attired with no ordinary care to receive him, at the time he
had appointed. Yet no Buchanan came.—Oh! could the petty triflers in
vanity and vice, know the power they gain, and the effect they produce
by these arts, they would contemn the facility of their own triumph.
It is ridiculous to acknowledge it, but this disappointment increased
Calantha’s anxiety to see him to the greatest possible degree: she scarce
could disguise the interest it created.

Gondimar unfortunately called at the moment when Calantha was most
impatient and irritable. “You expected another,” he said sarcastically;
“but I care not. I came not here in the hope of pleasing Lady Avondale.
I came to inform her.”—“I cannot attend now.” “Read this letter,” said
Gondimar. Calantha looked carelessly upon it—it was from himself:—it
contained an avowal of attachment and of interest for her; in proof
of which he asked permission to offer her a gift, which he said he was
commissioned to bring her from Italy. Lady Avondale returned the letter
coldly, and with little affectation of dignity, declined the intended
present. It is so easy to behave well, when it is our pleasure to do so,
as well as our duty. Gondimar, however, gave her but little credit for
her conduct. “You like me not?” he said. “Do you doubt my virtue?” she
replied eagerly. “Aye, Lady—or, at all events, your power of preserving
it.”

Whilst Gondimar yet spoke, Buchanan galopped by the window, and stopped
at the door of the house. His hands were decorated with rings, and a
gold chain and half-concealed picture hung around his neck:—his height,
his mustachios, the hussar trappings of his horse, the high colour in
his cheek, and his dark flowing locks, gave an air of savage wildness to
his countenance and figure, which much delighted Calantha. He entered
with familiar ease; talked much of himself, and more of some of his
military friends; stared at Gondimar, and then shook hands with him. After
which, he began a vehement explanation of his conduct respecting Alice;
assuring Calantha upon his honour—upon his soul, that he had no hand in
her elopement. He then talked of Ireland; described the dreadful, the
exaggerated accounts of what had occurred there; and ended by assuring
Gondimar that the young Glenarvon was not dead, but was at this time at
Belfont, concealed there with no other view than that of heading the
rebels. The accounts which the Duke of Altamonte had received in part
corroborated Buchanan’s statement.

Calantha listened, however, with more interest to the accounts Buchanan
now gave; and as he said he was but just returned from Dublin, even
Gondimar thought the news which he brought worthy of some attention.
“Send that damned Italian away,” said Buchanan in a loud whisper—“I have
a million of things to tell you. If you keep him here, I shall go:—my
remaining will be of no use.” Unaccustomed to curb herself in the least
wish, Calantha now whispered to Gondimar, that she wished him to leave
her, as she had something very particular to say to her cousin; but he
only smiled contemptuously upon him, and sternly asking her, since when
this amazing intimacy had arisen—placed himself near the pianoforte,
striking its chords with accompaniments till the annoyance was past
bearing.

Buchanan consoled himself by talking of his dogs and horses; and having
given Calantha a list of the names of each, began enumerating to her the
invitations he had received for the ensuing week. Fortunately, at this
moment, a servant entered with a note for Gondimar. “Does the bearer
wait?” he exclaimed with much agitation upon reading it; and immediately
left the room.

Upon returning home, Count Gondimar perceived with surprise, in the place
of the person he had expected, one of the attendants of the late Countess
of Glenarvon,—a man whose countenance and person he well remembered
from its peculiarly harsh and unpleasant expression.—“Is my young Lord
alive?” said the man in a stern manner. Count Gondimar replied in the
negative. “Then, Sir, I must trouble you with those affairs which most
nearly concern him.” “Your name, I think is Macpherson?” said Count
Gondimar. “You lived with the Countess of Glenarvon.” The man bowed,
and giving a letter into the hands of the Count, “I am come from Italy
at this time,” he replied, “in search of my late master—La Crusca and
myself.” “Is La Crusca with you?” said Gondimar starting. “The letter
will inform you of every particular,” replied the man with some gravity.
“I shall wait for the child, or your farther orders.” Saying this, he
left the Count’s apartment; and returned into the anti-chamber, where
a beautiful little boy was waiting for him.

On that very evening, after a long conversation with Macpherson, Count
Gondimar again sought Calantha at her father’s house, where, upon
enquiring for her, he was immediately admitted. After some little
hesitation, he told her that he had brought her the present of which he
had made mention in his letter; that if she had the unkindness to refuse
it, some other perhaps would take charge of it:—it was a gift which,
however unworthy he was to offer it, he thought would be dearer in her
estimation than the finest jewels, and the most costly apparel:—it was a
fair young boy, he said, fitted to be a Lady’s page, and trained in every
cunning art his tender years could learn. “He will be a play mate;” he
said smiling, “for your son, and when,” added he in a lower voice, “the
little Mowbrey can speak, he will learn to lisp in that language which
alone expresses all that the heart would utter—all that in a barbarous
dialect it dares not—must not say.”

As he yet spoke, he took the hat from off Zerbellini’s head, and gently
pushing him towards Calantha, asked him to sue for her protection. The
child immediately approached, hiding himself with singular fear from
the caresses of the Count. “Zerbellini,” said Gondimar in Italian, “will
you love that lady?” “In my heart;” replied the boy, shrinking back to
Calantha, as if to a late found but only friend. Sophia was called, and
joined in the general interest and admiration the child excited. Frances
shewed him to Lord Trelawney, who laughed excessively at beholding him.
Lady Margaret, who was present, looking upon him stedfastly, shrunk as
if she had seen a serpent in her way, and then recovering herself, held
her hand out towards him. Zerbellini fixed his eyes on Calantha, as if
watching in her countenance for the only commands which he was to obey;
and when she drew him towards her aunt, he knelt to her, and kissed her
hand with the customary grace and courtesy of an Italian.

From that day Calantha thought of nothing but Zerbellini. He was a new
object of interest:—to dress him, to amuse him, to shew him about, was
her great delight. Wherever she went he must accompany her: in whatever
she did or said, Zerbellini must bear a part. The Duke of Myrtlegrove
advised her to make him her page; and for this purpose he ordered him
the dress of an Eastern slave. Buchanan gave him a chain with a large
turquoise heart; and as he placed it around the boy, he glanced his eye
on Calantha. Presents, however, even more magnificent were in return
immediately dispatched by her to the Duke, and to Buchanan.

Count Gondimar read the letters Calantha had written with the gifts; for
she had left them, as was her custom, open upon the table. All she wrote,
or received, were thus left; not from ostentation, but indifference and
carelessness. “Are you mad,” said the Italian “or worse than mad?” “I
affect it not,” replied Lady Avondale. “I conclude, therefore that it is
real.” Indeed there was a strange compound in Calantha’s mind. She felt
but little accountable for her actions, and she often had observed that
if ever she had the misfortune to reflect and consequently to resolve
against any particular mode of conduct, the result was that she ever
fell into the error she had determined to avoid. She might indeed have
said that the spirit was willing but the flesh was weak; for whatever
she resolved, upon the slightest temptation to the contrary, she failed
to execute.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


“I am astonished my dear Gondimar,” said Viviani one day, addressing
him, “at the description which you gave me of Lady Avondale. I have seen
her since we conversed together about her, more than once; and there is
not, I think, much trace left of that excessive timidity of manner—that
monastic rigidity in her opinions and conduct, of which you made mention
in one of your letters from Castle Delaval.” “I was wrong, utterly wrong,”
said Gondimar, “and you may now rank this model of purity, this paragon
of wives, this pupil of nature, whom I have so often praised to you,
on a level with the rest of her fellow mortals.” “Not on a level—not
on a level,” replied Viviani with gravity; “but falling as I fear, far
beneath it.”

The Count then repeated in a solemn tone the description of Rome which
Lucian has placed in the mouth of Nigrinus applying the enumeration of
vices, temptations and corruptions, attributed to the fairest capital of
the world, to London; and then asked of Gondimar, if it were possible
for one like Calantha to sojourn long amidst such scenes, without in
some measure acquiring the manners, if not falling into the errors to
which the eyes and ears were every hour accustomed? He spoke of her
with regret, as he thus pronounced her on the verge of ruin:—“a prey,”
he said indignantly, “for the spoiler—the weak and willing victim of
vanity.” “The courts of her father are overrun with petitioners and
mendicants,” said Gondimar: “her apartments are filled with flatterers
who feed upon her credulity: she is in love with ruin: it stalks about
in every possible shape, and in every shape, she hails it:—woe is it;
victim of prosperity, luxury and self indulgence.”

“And Avondale,” said Viviani. “Lord Avondale,” replied the Count, “knows
not, thinks not, comprehends not her danger or his own. But the hour
of perdition approaches; the first years of peace and love are past;
folly succeeds; and vice is the after game. These are the three stages
in woman’s life. Calantha is swiftly passing through the second:—the
third will succeed. The days and months once glided away in a dream of
joy, dangerous and illusive—in a dream, I repeat; for all that depends
on the excess and durability of any violent passion, must be called a
dream. Such passion, even though sanctioned by the most sacred ties, if
it engrosses every thought, is not innocent—cannot be lawful. It plants
the seeds of corruption which flourish and gain strength hereafter. This
is the climate in which they will soonest ripen:—this is the garden
and soil, where they take the most rapid, and the deepest root.” “And
think you, that Calantha and Avondale, are already weary of each other?
that the warm and vivid imagination of youthful love is satiated with
excess? or that disappointment has followed upon a nearer view?” “All
passion,” replied Gondimar—falling back and impressively raising his
hand—“all passion is founded on”...“Friend,” said Viviani, “thy prate is
unmercifully tedious,”—“I half believe that thou art thyself in love with
this Calantha; but for an explanation and detail of that master passion,
I know not why I applied to you: Calantha is the object of your pursuit
not mine.” “Of my pursuit! in truth I believe you feel more interest
in her conduct than I do, I am old and weary of these follies; life is
just opening upon you; Calantha is your idol” “No,” replied Viviani,
with a smile of scorn. “It is not that party coloured butterfly, which
ranges ever from flower to flower, spreading its light pinions in the
summer breeze, or basking in the smiles of fortune, for which my life is
consumed, my soul is scorched with living fire, and my mind is impaired
and lost! Oh would to heaven that it were! No arts, no crimes were then
required to win and to enjoy. The pulse of passion beats high within
her, and pleads for the lover who dares to ask. Wild fancy, stimulated
by keen sensibility and restless activity of mind, without employment,
render her easy to be approached, and easy to be influenced and worked
upon. Love is the nature of these favourites of fortune: from earliest
infancy—they feel its power! and their souls enervated, live but upon
its honied vows. Chaste—pure! What are these terms? The solitary recluse
is not chaste, as I have heard; and these, never—never.”

“Yet Lady Margaret you say is unmoved.” “What of Lady Margaret?”
interrupted Viviani, while bitter smiles quivered upon his lip. “Do you
mark the pavement of stone upon which you tread? Do you see the steel
of which this sabre is composed—once heated by the flames, now hard
and insensible?—so cold,—so petrified is the heart, when it has once
given full vent to passion. Marble is that heart which only beats for
my destruction. The time is not yet arrived, but I will dash the cup of
joy from her lips; then drink the dregs myself, and die.” “Mere jealous
threats,” said Gondimar. “The curse of innocent blood is on her,” replied
Viviani, as his livid cheeks and lips resumed a purple dye. “Name her no
more.” “Explain yourself,” cried his astonished friend. “You frequently
allude to scenes of deeper guilt and horror, than I dare even suffer
myself to imagine possible.” “The heart of man is unfathomable,” replied
Viviani;—“that which seems, is not:—that which is, seems not: we should
neither trust our eyes nor ears, in a world like this. But time, which
ripens all things, shall disclose the secrets even of the dead.”

A short time after this conversation with Gondimar, Viviani took leave
of him. He informed him fully of his projects; and Lady Margaret was
also consulted upon the occasion. “What is become of your menaced
vengeance,” she said, smiling upon him, in their last parting interview.
He laughed at the remembrance of his words. “Am I the object now of your
abhorrence,” she said, placing her white hand carelessly upon his head.
“Not absolutely,” replied the young Count, shrinking, however, from
the pressure of that hand. “Touch me not,” he whispered more earnestly,
“it thrills through my soul.—Keep those endearments for Dartford: leave
me in peace.” Immediately after this he left London; and by the first
letter Lady Margaret received from him, she found that he was preparing
to embark.




CHAPTER XXIX.


Frances Seymour’s marriage with Lord Trelawny was now celebrated, after
which the whole family left London for Ireland.

Sophia, previous to her departure, reproved Calantha for her obstinacy,
as she called it, in remaining in town. “I leave you with pain,” she
said: “forgive me if I say it, for I see you have no conception of the
folly of your conduct. Ever in extremes, you have acted as I little
expected from the wife of Lord Avondale; but I blame him equally for
giving you such unbounded freedom:—only the very wise and the very
good know how to use it.” “Sophia,” replied Calantha, “I wish not for
reproaches:—have confidence in me:—we cannot all be exactly alike. You
are a pattern of propriety and virtue, and verily you have your reward:—I
act otherwise, and am prepared for censures:—even yours cannot offend
me. Lord Avondale talks of soon returning to Ireland: I shall then
leave this dear delightful London without regret; and you shall find
me when we all meet for the spring at Castle Delaval, just the same, as
when I entered it.” “Never the same,” thought Sophia, who marked, with
astonishment, the change a few months had made.

They were yet speaking, and taking a cold farewell of each other, when
a thundering rap at the door interrupted them, and before Sophia could
retreat, Mr. Fremore, Count Gondimar and Lady Mandeville were ushered in.
A frozen courtesy, and an austere frown, were the only signs of animation
Sophia gave, as she vanished from their view; for she seemed hardly to
have energy sufficient left, to walk out of the room in an ordinary manner.

“You have been ill,” said Lady Mandeville, accosting Calantha. “It is
a week since I have seen you. Think not, however, that I am come to
intrude upon your time: I only called, as I passed your door, to enquire
after you. Mr. Fremore tells me you are about to visit the Princess
of Madagascar. Is this true? for I never believe any thing I hear?”
“For once,” said Calantha, “you may do so; and on this very evening,
my introduction is to take place.” “It is with regret I hear it,” said
Lady Mandeville with a sigh: “we shall never more see any thing of you.
Besides, she is not my friend.” Calantha assured Lady Mandeville her
attachment could endure all sorts of trials; and laughingly enquired
of her respecting her lovers, Apollonius, and the Greek Lexicon she
was employed in translating. Lady Mandeville answered her with some
indifference on these subjects; and having said all that she could in
order to dissuade her against visiting the Princess, took her leave.

That evening, at the hour of ten, Lord Avondale and Mr. Fremore being in
readiness, Calantha drove according to appointment to visit the wife of
the great Nabob, the Princess of Madagascar. Now who is so ignorant as
not to know that this Lady resides in an old-fashioned gothic building,
called Barbary House, three miles beyond the turnpike? and who is so
ignorant as not to be aware that her highness would not have favoured
Lady Avondale with an audience, had she been otherwise than extremely well
with the world, as the phrase is—for she was no patroness of the fallen!
the caresses and _petits mots obligeants_ which dropt from her during
this her first interview, raised Lady Avondale in her own opinion; but
that was unnecessary. What was more to the purpose, it won her entirely
towards the Princess.

Calantha now, for the first time, conversed with the learned of the
land:—she heard new opinions started, and old ones refuted; and she gazed
unhurt, but not unawed, upon reviewers, poets, critics, and politicians.
At the end of a long gallery, two thick wax tapers, rendering “darkness
visible,” the princess was seated. A poet of an emaciated and sallow
complexion stood beside her; of him it was affirmed that in apparently
the kindest and most engaging manner, he, at all times, said precisely
that which was most unpleasant to the person he appeared to praise. This
yellow hyena had, however, a heart noble, magnanimous and generous; and
even his friends, could they but escape from his smile and his tongue,
had no reason to complain. Few events, if any, were ever known to move
the Princess from her position. Her pages—her foreign attire, but genuine
English manners, voice and complexion, attracted universal admiration.
She was beautiful too, and had a smile it was difficult to learn to hate
or to mistrust. She spoke of her own country with contempt; and, even in
her dress, which was magnificent, attempted to prove the superiority of
every other over it. Her morals were simple and uncorrupt, and in matters
of religious faith she entirely surrendered herself to the guidance of
Hoiaouskim. She inclined her head a little upon seeing Lady Avondale;
the _dead_, I mean the sick poet, did the same; and Hoiaouskim, her high
priest, cast his eyes, with unassuming civility, upon Calantha, thus
welcoming her to Barbary House.

The princess then spoke a little sentence—just enough to shew how much
she intended to protect Lady Avondale. She addressed herself, besides,
in many dialects, to an outlandish set of menials; appointing every
one in the room some trifling task, which was performed in a moment by
young and old, with surprising alacrity. Such is the force of fashion
and power, when skilfully applied. After this, she called Calantha: a
slight exordium followed then a wily pointed catechism; her Highness
nodding at intervals, and dropping short epigrammatic sentences, when
necessary, to such as were in attendance around her. “Is she acting?”
said Calantha, at length, in a whisper, addressing the sallow complexioned
Poet, who stood sneering and simpering behind her chair. “Is she acting,
or is this reality?” “It is the only reality you will ever find in the
Princess,” returned her friend. “She acts the Princess of Madagascar
from morning till night, and from night till morning. You may fall from
favour, but you are now at the height: no one ever advanced further—none
ever continued there long.”

“But why,” said Lady Avondale, “do the great Nabob, and all the other
Lords in waiting, with that black horde of savages”—“Reviewers, you mean,
and men of talents.” “Well, whatever they are, tell me quickly why they
wear collars, and chains around their necks at Barbary House?” “It is the
fashion,” replied the poet. “This fashion is unbecoming your race,” said
Lady Avondale: “I would die sooner than be thus enchained.” “The great
Nabob,” quoth Mr. Fremore, joining in the discourse, “is the best, the
kindest, the cleverest man I know; but, like some philosophers, he would
sacrifice much for a peaceable life. The Princess is fond of inflicting
these lesser tyrannies: she is so helplessly attached to these trifles—so
overweaningly fond of exerting her powers, it were a pity to thwart
her. For my own part, I could willingly bend to the yoke, provided the
duration were not eternal; for observe that the chains are well gilded;
that the tables are well stored; and those who bend the lowest are ever
the best received.” “And if I also bow my neck,” said Calantha, “will
she be grateful? May I depend upon her seeming kindness?” The Poet’s
naturally pale complexion turned to a bluish green at this enquiry.

Cold Princess! where are your boasted professions now? You taught Calantha
to love you, by every petty art of which your sex is mistress. She heard,
from your lips, the sugared poisons you were pleased to lavish upon her.
You laughed at her follies, courted her confidence, and flattered her
into a belief that you loved her. Loved her!—it is a feeling you never
felt. She fell into the mire; the arrows of your precious crew were shot
at her—like hissing snakes hot and sharpened with malice and venomed
fire; and you, yes—you were the first to scorn her:—you, by whom she
had stood faithfully and firmly amidst a host of foes—aye, amidst the
fawning rabble, who still crowd your doors, and laugh at and despise
you. Thanks for the helping hand of friendship in the time of need—the
mud and the mire have been washed from Calantha; the arrows have been
drawn from a bleeding bosom; the heart is still sound, and beats to
disdain you. The sun may shine fairly again upon her; but never, whilst
existence is prolonged, will she set foot in the gates of the Palace of
the great Nabob, or trust to the smiles and professions of the Princess
of Madagascar.




CHAPTER XXX.


“And what detains you in town?” said Gondimar, on the eve of Mrs. Seymour
and Sophia’s departure. “Will this love of gaiety never subside. Tell
me, Lady Avondale, do you believe all that the Duke of Myrtlegrove,
and your more warlike cousin have said to you?—What means the blush on
your indignant cheek? The young duke is more enamoured of the lustre
of his diamond ring and broach, than of the brightest eyes that ever
gazed on him; and though the words glory and renown drop from the mouth
of Buchanan, love, I think, has lost his time in aiming arrows at his
heart. Has he one?—I think not? But who has one in London?” “You have
not assuredly,” said the Count: “and, if you knew the censures that
are every where passed upon you, I think, for Lord Avondale’s sake, you
would regret it.” “I do; but indeed—”

The entrance of Buchanan put a stop to this conversation. “Are you ready?”
he cried. “Ready! I have waited for you three hours: it is five, and you
promised to come before two.” “You would excuse me, I am sure, if you knew
how excessively ill I have been. I am but this moment out of bed. That
accursed hazard kept me up till ten this morning. Once, I sat two days
and nights at it: but it’s no matter.” “You take no care of yourself.—I
wish for my sake you would.” The manner in which Calantha said this, was
most particularly flattering and kind: it was, indeed, ever so; but the
return she met with (like the lady who loved the swine. “Honey,” quoth
she, “thou shalt in silver salvers dine.” “Humph,” quoth he) was most
uncourteous. “Truly I care not if I am knocked on the head to-morrow,”
replied Buchanan. “There is nothing worth living for in life: every thing
annoys me: I am sick of all society, Love, sentiment, is my abhorrence.”
“But driving, dearest Buchanan,—riding,—your mother—your—your cousin.”
“Oh, d..n it; don’t talk about it. It’s all a great bore.”

“And can Lady Avondale endure this jargon?” “What is that Italian here
again?” whispered Buchanan. “But come, let’s go. My horses must not
wait, they are quite unbroke; and the boy can’t hold them. Little Jem
yesterday had his ribs broke; and this youngster’s no hand. Where shall we
drive?” “To perdition,” whispered Gondimar. “Can’t wait,” said Buchanan,
impatiently: and Calantha hurried away.

The curricle was beautiful; the horses fiery; Buchanan in high spirits;
and Calantha—ah must it be confessed?—more elated with this exhibition
through the crowded streets, than she could have been at the most glorious
achievement. “Drive faster,—faster still,” she continually said, to shew
her courage. Alas! real courage delights not in parade; but anything that
had the appearance of risk or danger, delighted Calantha. “Damn it, how
Alice pulls.” “Alice!” said Calantha. “Oh hang it; don’t talk of that.
Here’s Will Rattle, let me speak to him; and Dick, the boxer’s son. Do
you mind stopping? Not in the least.” Saying which they pulled in, as
Buchanan termed it; and a conversation ensued, which amused Calantha
extremely. “How soon shall you be off?” said Will Rattle, as they prepared
to drive on.—“It’s a devilish bore staying in London now,” replied
Buchanan: “only I’ve been commanded to stay,” saying which he smiled,
and turned to Lady Avondale, “or I should have been with my regiment
before this. The moment I am released, however, I shall go there.—Hope
to see you to-night, Will. Mind and bring Charles Turner.—There’s a new
play. Oh I forgot:—perhaps I shan’t be let off; shall I?” “No,” replied
Calantha, extremely pleased at this flattering appeal. Will bowed with
conceit, and off they galloped, Buchanan repeating as they went, “A
damned strange fellow that—cleverer than half the people though, who make
such a noise. I saved his life once in an engagement. Poor Will, he’s
so grateful, he would give all he has for me,—I’ll be d—d if he would
not.” Let this suffice. The drive was not very long; and, the danger of
being overturned excepted, utterly devoid of interest.

Lady Dartford had returned to town. Perhaps no one ever heard that
she had left it: like the rose leaf upon the glass full of water, her
innocent presence made not the slightest difference, nor was her absence
at any time observed. She, however, called upon Calantha, a few moments
after Buchanan had taken her home. Lady Avondale was with her lord, in
the library when she came. “Why did you let her in?” she said rather
crossly to the servant; when another loud rap at the door announced Lady
Mandeville and Lady Augusta Selwyn. Calantha was writing a letter; and
Lord Avondale was talking to her of the arrangements for their departure.
“I wish I ever could see you one moment alone,” he said, “Say I am
coming—or shall not come,” she replied; and during the time she remained
to finish the conversation with her husband, she could not help amusing
herself with the thought of Lady Dartford’s alarm, at finding herself
in the presence of Lady Mandeville, whom she did not visit. “You do not
attend at all,” said Lord Avondale; “you are of no use whatever;” Alas!
he had already found that the mistress of his momentary passion, was not
the friend and companion of his more serious thoughts. Calantha was of
no use to any one. She began to feel the bitterness of this certainty,
but she fled from the reflection with pain.

Eager to amuse Lady Dartford, Lady Augusta, who knew her well, entertained
her till Lady Avondale joined them, with a variety of anecdotes of all
that had taken place since her departure; and, having soon exhausted
other subjects, began upon Calantha herself. “She is positively in love
with Captain Buchanan,” said she. “At every ball he dances with her; at
every supper he is by her side; all London is talking of it. Only think
too how strange, just as he was said to have proposed to Miss Macvicker—a
fortune—twenty thousand a year—a nice girl, who really looks unhappy.
Poor thing, it is very hard on her.—I always feel for girls.” “Come,”
said Lady Mandeville, “last night you know, they did not interchange a
word: he talked the whole evening to that young lady with the singular
name. How I detest gossiping and scandal. Calantha deserves not this.”
“Bless us, how innocent we are all of a sudden,” interrupted Lady Augusta!
“have you any pretentions, dearest lady, to that innoxtious quality? Now
are you not aware that this is the very perfection of the art of making
love—this not speaking? But this is what always comes of those who are
so mighty fond of their husbands. Heavens, how sick I have been of all
the stories of their romantic attachment. There is nothing, my dear,
like Miss Seymour, or making one sick. She always gives me the vapours.”

“Where do you go to-night?” said Lady Dartford, wishing to interrupt a
conversation which gave her but little pleasure. “Oh, to fifty places;
but I came here partly too in the hope of engaging Lady Avondale to
come to me to-night. She is a dear soul, and I do not like her the worse
for shewing a little spirit.” “I cannot,” said Lady Mandeville, “think
there is much in this; a mere caprice, founded on both sides in a little
vanity. After seeing Lord Avondale, I cannot believe there is the smallest
danger for her. Good heavens, if I had possessed such a husband!” “Oh,
now for sentiment,” said Augusta: “and God knows, if I had possessed a
dozen such, I should have felt as I do at this moment. Variety—variety!
Better change for the worse than always see the same object.” “Well,
if you do not allow the merit of Henry Avondale to outweigh this love
of variety, what say you to Mr. Buchanan, being her cousin, brought up
with her from a child.” “Thanks for the hint—you remember the song of

     “_Nous nous aimions dès l’enfance
     Tête-à-Tête à chaque instant._”

and I am certain, my dear sentimental friend, that

       “_A notre place
     Vous en auriez fait autant._”

Then going up to the glass Lady Augusta bitterly inveighed against
perverse nature, who with such a warm heart, had given her such an ugly
face. “Do you know,” she said, still gazing upon her uncouth features,
addressing herself to Lady Dartford—“do you know that I have fallen in
love myself, since I saw you;—and with whom do you think?” “I think I
can guess, and shall take great credit to myself, if I am right. Is not
the happy man an author?” said Lady Dartford.—“You have him, upon my
honour—Mr. Clarendon, by all that is wonderful:—he is positively the
cleverest man about town.—Well I am glad to see my affairs also make
some little noise in the world,”—“I can tell you however,” said Lady
Mandeville, “that he is already engaged;—and Lady Mounteagle occupies
every thought of his heart.”

“Good gracious, my dear, living and loving have done but little for you;
and the dead languages prevent your judging of living objects.—Engaged!
you talk of falling in love, as if it were a matrimonial contract
for life. Now don’t you know that every thing in nature is subject to
change:—it rains to-day—it shines to-morrow;—we laugh,—we cry;—and the
thermometer of love rises and falls, like the weather glass, from the
state of the atmosphere:—one while it is at freezing point;—another it
is at fever heat.—How then should the only imaginary thing in the whole
affair—the object I mean which is _always purely ideal_—how should that
remain the same?”

Lady Mandeville smiled a little, and turning her languid blue eyes upon
Lady Dartford, asked her if she were of the christian persuasion? Lady
Dartford was perfectly confounded:—she hesitatingly answered in the
affirmative. Upon which, Lady Augusta fell back in her chair, and laughed
immoderately; but fearful of offending her newly made acquaintance,
observed to her, that she wore the prettiest hat she had ever seen.
“Where did you get it?” said she.—The question was a master key to Lady
Dartford’s thoughts:—caps, hats and works of every description were
as much a solace to her, in the absence of her husband, as the greek
language, or the pagan philosophy could ever have been to Lady Mandeville,
under any of her misfortunes.—“I got it,” said she, brightening up
with a grateful look, at the only enquiry she had heard, that was at
all adapted to her understanding, at Madame de la Roche’s:—“it is the
cheapest thing you can conceive:—I only gave twenty guineas for it:—and
you know I am not reckoned very clever at making bargains.” “I should
think not,” answered Lady Augusta, adverting only to the first part of
the sentence.

Calantha entered at this moment. “Oh my sweet soul,” said Lady Augusta,
embracing her, “I began to despair of seeing you.—But what was the matter
with you last night? I had just been saying that you looked so very grave.
Notwithstanding which, Lord Dallas could think, and talk only of you. He
says your chevelure is perfectly grecian—the black ringlets upon the white
skin; but I never listen to any compliment that is not paid directly or
indirectly to myself. He is quite adorable:—do you not think so, hey?—no—I
see he is too full of admiration for you—too refined. Lady Avondale’s
heart must be won in a far different manner:—insult—rudeness—is the way
to it.—What! blush so deeply! Is the affair, then, too serious for a
jest? Why, _mon enfant_, you look like Miss Macvicker this morning.—And
is it true she will soon be united to you by the ties of blood, as she
now seems to be by those of sympathy and congeniality of soul?”

The eternal Count Gondimar, and afterwards Buchanan interrupted Lady
Augusta’s attack. New topics of discourse were discussed:—it will be
needless to detail them:—time presses. Balls, assemblies follow:—every
day exhibited a new scene of frivolity and extravagance;—every night
was passed in the same vortex of fashionable dissipation.




CHAPTER XXXI.


The spring was far advanced. Calantha’s health required the sea air;
but her situation rendered a long journey hazardous. Lord Avondale
resolved to await her confinement in England. The birth of a daughter
was an additional source of happiness: Anabel was the name given to the
little infant. Harry Mowbray was now in his second year. The accounts
from Ireland were more satisfactory. Mrs. Seymour wrote constantly to
Calantha regretting her absence. Weeks, however, flew by, in the same
thoughtless vanities: months passed away without regret or care.—Autumn
was gone:—winter again approached.—London, though deserted, by the
crowd, was still gay. Calantha lived much with her Aunt Margaret, Lady
Mandeville, and the Princess of Madagascar. The parks and streets, but
lately so thronged with carriages, were now comparatively lonely and
deserted. Like the swallows at the appointed hour, the gay tribe of
fashionable idlers had vanished; and a new set of people appeared in
their place:—whence, or why, nobody could guess.

One day Zerbellini, Calantha’s little page, had just returned
with a note from Buchanan; a french hair dresser was cutting her
hair; milliners and jewellers were displaying upon every table new
dresses—caps—chains—rings—for the ensuing winter; and Calantha’s eye was
dazzled—her ear was charmed—when her aunt Margaret entered.—“God bless
your Ladyship, God preserve you,” said a woman half starved, who was
waiting for an answer to her petition.—“_Mi Lady; ne prendra-t-elle pas
ce petit bonnet?_” said Madame la Roche. “Yes, every thing, any thing,”
she answered impatiently, as she got up to receive her aunt.—She was
unusually grave. Calantha trembled; for she thought she was prepared to
speak to her about Buchanan. She was extremely relieved when she found
that her censures turned solely upon her page. “Why keep that little
foreign minion?” she said, indignantly. “Is the Count Viviani so very
dear, that any present of his must be thus treasured up and valued?”
“The Count Viviani?” said Calantha astonished: “who is he?”—“Well, then,
Gondimar,” replied Lady Margaret. “Calantha—as a favour, I request you
send back that boy.”—Lady Avondale’s prayers were at first her sole
reply; and like Titania, in her second, when Oberon demanded the trusty
Henchman, she boldly refused. Lady Margaret left her immediately:—she
was calm, but offended. She was then going to Castle Delaval. Calantha
told her they should join her there in the course of the next month.
She only smiled, with a look of incredulity and contempt; asking her, if
her beloved Henry would really be so cruel as to tear her away at last
from London? and saying this she took leave.

Lord Avondale and Calantha had been conversing on this very subject in the
morning. He was surprised at her ready acquiescence in his wish to return
to Ireland. “You are then still the same,” he said affectionately.—“I am
the same,” she replied rather fretfully; “but you are changed:—every one
tells me you neglect me.” “And have they who tell you so,” said he with
a sigh, “any very good motive in thus endeavouring to injure me in your
opinion? If I attended to what every one said, Calantha, perhaps I too
should have some reason to complain.—Business of importance has alone
engaged my attention. You know I am not one who assumes much; and if I
say that I have been employed, you may depend on its being the case. I
hope, then, I am not wrong when I have confided myself, and every thing
that is dearest to me, to your honour and your love.”—“Ah no:—you are
not wrong,” she answered; “but perhaps if you confided less, and saw
more of me, it would be better. Before marriage, a woman has her daily
occupations: she looks for the approving smile of her parents:—she has
friends who cheer her—who take interest in her affairs. But when we
marry, Henry, we detach ourselves from all, to follow one guide. For the
first years, we are the constant object of your solicitude:—you watch
over us with even a tenderer care than those whom we have left, and then
you leave us—leave us too, among the amiable and agreeable, yet reprove
us, if we confide in them, or love them. Marriage is the annihilation
of love.”

“The error is in human nature,” said Lord Avondale smiling—“We always
see perfection in that which we cannot approach:—there is a majesty in
distance and rarity, which every day’s intercourse wears off. Besides,
love delights in gazing upon that which is superior:—whilst we believe you
angels, we kneel to you, we are your slaves;—we awake and find women, and
expect obedience:—and is it not what you were made for?”—“Henry, we are
made your idols too—too long, to bear this sad reverse:—you should speak
to us in the language of truth from the first, or never.—Obey—is a fearful
word to those who have lived without hearing it; and truth from lips which
have accustomed us to a dearer language, sounds harsh and discordant.
We have renounced society, and all the dear ties of early friendship,
to form one strong engagement, and if that fails, what are we in the
world?—beings without hope, or interest—dependants—encumbrances—shadows
of former joys—solitary wanderers in quest of false pleasures—or lonely
recluses, unblessing and unblest.”

Calantha had talked herself into tears, at the conclusion of this
sentence; and Lord Avondale, smiling at a description she had given, so
little according with the gay being who stood before him, pressed her
fondly to his bosom; and said he would positively hear no more. “You treat
me like a child—a fool,”—she said:—“you forget that I am a reasonable
creature.” “I do, indeed, Calantha:—you so seldom do any thing to remind
me of it.” “Well, Henry, one day you shall find your error. I feel that
within, which tells me that I could be superior—aye—very superior to
those who cavil at my faults, and first encourage and then ridicule me
for them. I love—I honour you, Henry. You never flatter me. Even if you
neglect me, you have confidence in me—and, thank God, my heart is still
worthy of some affection.—It is yet time to amend.” Calantha—thought it
had been—as she took in haste a review of her former conduct—of time,
how neglected!—friends, how estranged!—money lavished in vain!—and health
impaired by the excess of late hours, and endless, ceaseless dissipation.

London had still attractions for Calantha; but the thought of fresh air,
and green fields recurring, she was soon prepared for the journey. She
passed the intervening days before her departure in taking leave of her
friends. Lady Mandeville, in bidding adieu to her, affirmed that the
interchange of ideas between congenial souls, would never be lessened,
nor interrupted by absence. She would write to her, she said, and she
would think of her; and, seeing Calantha was really sorry to part with
her, “You have none of the philosophy,” she said, “which your cousin
and your aunt possess, and every trifle, therefore, has power to afflict
you:—you scarcely know me, and yet you are grieved to leave me. Promise
ever to judge of me by what you see yourself, and not through the medium
of others; for the world, which I despise from my soul, has long sought
to crush me, because I had pride of character enough to think for myself.”

If any thing had been wanting to strengthen Calantha’s regard, this boast
had been sure of its effect; for it was one of her favourite opinions,
not indeed that the world should be despised, but that persons should
dare to think, and act for themselves, even though against its judgments.
She was not then, aware how this cant phrase is ever in the mouths of the
veriest slaves to prejudice,—how little real independence of character is
found amongst those who have lost sight of virtue. Like spendthrifts, who
boast of liberality, they are forced to stoop to arts and means, which
those whom they affect to contemn, would blush even to think of. Virtue
alone can hope to stand firm and unawed above the multitude. When vice
assumes this fearless character, it is either unblushing effrontery and
callous indifference to the opinion of the wise and good, or at best,
but overweening pride, which supports the culprit, and conceals from
the eyes of others, the gnawing tortures he endures—the bitter agonizing
consciousness of self-reproach.




CHAPTER XXXII.


Lord Avondale was desirous of passing the winter with his family at
Monteith, and in the spring he had promised the Duke of Altamonte to
accompany Lady Avondale to Castle Delaval. Lady Mandeville and Lady
Augusta Selwyn were invited to meet them there at that time. The wish
of pleasing Calantha, of indulging even her very weaknesses, seemed to
be the general failing of all who surrounded her:—yet what return did
she make?—each day new follies engrossed her thoughts;—her levity and
extravagance continually increased; and whilst with all the ostentation
of generosity she wasted the fortune of her husband upon the worthless
and the base,—he denied himself every amusement, secretly and kindly
to repair the ruin—the misery—the injustice her imprudence and wanton
prodigality had caused.

During a long and melancholy journey, and after her arrival at Monteith,
Calantha, with some astonishment, considered the difference of Lord
Avondale’s views, character and even talents for society and conversation,
as compared with those of her former companions. Lord Avondale had no love
of ostentation—no effort—a perfect manliness of conduct and character, a
real, and not feigned, indifference to the opinion and applause of the
vain and the foolish; yet with all this, he was happy, cheerful, ready
to enter into every amusement or occupation which gave others pleasure.
He had not one selfish feeling. It was impossible not to be forcibly
struck with the comparison.

Calantha, with her usual inconsistency, now made all those sensible and
judicious remarks which people always make, when they have lived a life
of folly, and suddenly return to a more tranquil course. She compared
the false gaiety which arises from incessant hurry and vanity, with that
which is produced by nature and health. She looked upon the blue sky
and the green fields; watched the first peeping snow-drop and crocus;
and entered with delight into all the little innocent pleasures of a
rural life: nor did even a slight restlessness prevail, nor any erring
thoughts steal back to revisit the gay scenes she had left. In very truth
she was more adapted, she said, to her present course of life than to
any other; and, however guilty of imprudence, she thanked God she had
not heavier sins to answer for; nor was there a thought of her heart,
she would not have wished her husband to know, unless from the fear of
either giving him pain or betraying others.

At length, however, and by degrees, something of disquiet began to
steal in upon the serenity of her thoughts:—her mind became agitated,
and sought an object:—study, nay, labour she had preferred to this
total want of interest. While politics and military movements engaged
Lord Avondale almost wholly, and the rest of the family seemed to exist
happily enough in the usual course, she longed for she knew not what.
There was a change in her sentiments, but she could not define it. It
was not as it had been once: yet there was no cause for complaint. She
was happy, but her heart seemed not to partake of her happiness: regret
mingled at times with her enjoyments.

Lady Mowbray spoke with some asperity of her late conduct; Lady Elizabeth
enquired laughingly if all she heard were true; for every folly, every
fault, exaggerated and misrepresented, had flown before her: she found
that all which she had considered as merely harmless, now appeared in a
new and more unpleasing light. Censures at home and flattery abroad are
a severe trial to the vain and the proud. She thought her real friends
austere; and cast one longing glance back upon the scene which had been
so lately illumined by the gaiety, the smiles, the kindness and courtesy
of her new acquaintance.

Whilst the first and only care of Lord Avondale, every place was alike
delightful to Calantha; for in his society she enjoyed all that she
desired; but now that she saw him estranged, absent, involved in deeper
interests, she considered, with some feelings of alarm, the loneliness
of her own situation. In the midst of hundreds, she had no real
friends:—those of her childhood were estranged from her by her marriage;
and those her marriage had united her with, seemed to perceive only her
faults, nor appreciated the merits she possessed. To dress well, to talk
well, to write with ease and perspicuity, had never been her turn. Unused
to the arts and amusements of social intercourse, she had formerly felt
interest in poetry, in music, in what had ceased to be, or never had
existed; but now the same amusements, the same books, had lost their
charm: she knew more of the world, and saw and felt their emptiness and
fallacy. In the society of the generality of women and men she could
find amusement when any amusement was to be found; but, day after day,
to hear sentiments she could not think just, and to lose sight of all
for which she once had felt reverence and enthusiasm, was hard. If she
named one she loved, that one was instantly considered as worthless:
if she expressed much eagerness for the success of any project, that
eagerness was the subject of ridicule.

Oh I am changed, she continually thought; I have repressed and conquered
every warm and eager feeling; I love and admire nothing; yet am I not
heartless and cold enough for the world in which I live. What is it
that makes me miserable? There is a fire burns within my soul; and all
those whom I see and hear are insensible. Avondale alone feels as I do;
but alas! it is no longer for me. Were I dead, what difference would it
make to any one? I am the object of momentary amusement or censure to
thousands; but, of love, to none. I am as a child, as a mistress to my
husband; but never his friend, his companion. Oh for a heart’s friend,
in whom I could confide every thought and feeling; who would share and
sympathize with my joy or sorrow; to whom I could say, “you love me—you
require my presence;” and for whom in return I would give up every other
enjoyment. Such friend was once Lord Avondale. By what means have I lost
him?

Often when in tears she thus expressed herself. Her husband would
suddenly enter; laugh with her without penetrating her feelings; or,
deeply interested in the cares of business, seek her only as a momentary
solace and amusement. Such, however, he seldom now found her; for she
cherished a discontented spirit within her; and though too proud and
stubborn to complain, she lived but on the memory of the past.

Calantha’s principles had received a shock, the force and effect of
which was greatly augmented by a year of vanity and folly; her health
too was impaired from late hours and an enervating life; she could not
walk or ride as formerly; and her great occupation was the indulgence of
a useless and visionary train of thinking. She imagined that which was
not, and lost sight of reality;—pictured ideal virtues, and saw not the
world as it is. Her heart beat with all the fervour of enthusiasm; but
the turn it took was erroneous. She heard the conversation of others;
took a mistaken survey of society; and withdrew herself imperceptibly
from all just and reasonable views. Ill motives were imputed to her, for
what she considered harmless imprudence; she felt the injustice of these
opinions; and, instead of endeavouring to correct those appearances which
had caused such severe animadversion, in absolute disgust she steeled
herself against all remonstrances. Every one smiles on me and seems to
love me—the world befriends me—she continually thought; yet I am censured
and misrepresented. My relations—the only enemies I have—are those who
profess to be my friends. Convinced of this, she became lonely. She had
thoughts which once she would have mentioned as they occurred, but which
she now concealed and kept solely to herself. She became dearer in her
own estimation, as she detached herself from others, and began to feel
coldly, even towards those whom she had once loved.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


It is dangerous to begin life by surrendering every feeling of the
mind and the heart to any violent passion—Calantha had loved and been
loved to such an excess, that all which followed it appeared insipid.
Vanity might fill the space for a moment, or friendship, or charity,
or benevolence; but still there was something gone which, had it never
existed, had never been missed and required. Lord Avondale was perhaps
more indulgent and more affectionate now, than at first; for a lover
ever plays the tyrant; but even this indulgence was different; and that
look of adoration—that blind devotion—that ardent, constant solitude,
when, without a single profession, one may feel certain of being the
first object in life to the person thus attached,—all this was past.

Such love is not depravity. To have felt it, and to feel it no more, is
like being deprived of the light of the sun, and seeing the same scenes,
which we once viewed brilliant beneath its beams, dark, clouded and
cheerless.—Calantha had given up her heart too entirely to its power,
ever more to endure existence without it. Her home was a desert; her
thoughts were heavy and dull; her spirits and her health were gone; and
even the desire of pleasing, so natural to the vain, had ceased. Whom
was she to wish to please, since Avondale was indifferent? or what to
her was the same, absent and preoccupied.

Such depression continued during the gloomy wintry months; but with the
first warm breeze of spring, they left her; and in the month of May,
she prepared to join the splendid party which was expected at Castle
Delaval—as gay in heart herself as if she had never moralized upon the
perishableness of all human happiness.

Upon a cool and somewhat dreary morning in the month of May, Calantha
left Monteith, and, sleeping one night at Allenwater, hastened to Castle
Delaval, where blazing hearths and joyous countenances, gave her a
cheering welcome. Lady Mandeville and Lady Augusta had, according to
promise, arrived there a week before, to the utter consternation of Mrs.
Seymour. Calantha perceived in one moment, that she was not extremely
well with her or with her cousins upon this account. Indeed the former
scarcely offered her her hand, such a long detail of petty offences had
been registered against her, since they had last parted. It was also
justly imputed to Calantha that Lady Mandeville had been invited to the
Castle. A stately dignity was therefore assumed by Sophia and Mrs. Seymour
on this occasion: they scarce permitted themselves to smile during the
whole time Lady Mandeville remained, for fear, as Calantha concluded,
that Satan, taking advantage of a moment of levity, should lead them
into further evil. The being compelled to live in company with one of
her character, was more than enough.

“I am enraptured at your arrival,” said Lady Augusta, flying towards
Calantha, the moment she perceived her. “You are come at the happiest
time: you will be diverted here in no ordinary manner: the days of
romance, are once again displayed to our wondering view.” “Yes,” said
Lady Trelawney, “not a day passes without an adventure.” Before Calantha
enquired into the meaning of this, she advanced to Lady Mandeville, who,
languidly reclining upon a couch, smiled sweetly on seeing her. Secure
of the impression she had made, she waited to be sought, and throwing
her arm around her, gave her kisses so soft and so tender, that she
could not immediately extricate herself from her embrace.

Lady Augusta, eager to talk, exclaimed—“Did you meet any of the patrole?”
“I was reading the address to the united Irishmen,” said Calantha,
who could hear and think of nothing else. “Are you aware who is the
author?” “No; but it is so eloquent, so animated, I was quite alarmed
when I thought how it must affect the people.” “You shock me, Calantha,”
said Mrs. Seymour. “The absurd rhapsody you mean, is neither eloquent
nor animating: it is a despicable attempt to subvert the government,
a libel upon the English, and a poor piece of flattery to delude the
infatuated malcontents in Ireland.” Lady Augusta winked at Calantha, as
if informing her that she touched upon a sore subject. “The author,” said
Lady Trelawney, who affected to be an enthusiast, “is Lord Glenarvon.”

“I wish Frances,” said Mrs. Seymour, “you would call people by their
right names. The young man you call Lord Glenarvon, has no claim to that
title; his grandfather was a traitor; his father was a poor miserable
exile, who was obliged to enter the Navy by way of gaining a livelihood;
his mother was a woman of very doubtful character (as she said this she
looked towards Lady Mandeville); and this young man, educated nobody knows
how, having passed his time in a foreign country, nobody knows where,
from whence he was driven it seems by his crimes, is now unfortunately
arrived here to pervert and mislead others, to disseminate his wicked
doctrines amongst an innocent but weak people, and to spread the flames
of rebellion, already kindled in other parts of the Island. Oh, he is a
dishonour to his sex; and it makes me mad to see how you all run after
him, and forget both dignity and modesty, to catch a glimpse of him.”

“What sort of looking man is he, dear aunt?” said Calantha.
“Frightful—mean,” said Mrs. Seymour. “His stature is small,” said Lady
Mandeville; “but his eye is keen and his voice is sweet and tunable.
Lady Avondale believe me, he is possessed of that persuasive language,
which never fails to gain upon its hearers. Take heed to your heart:
remember my words,—beware of the young Glenarvon.” Gondimar, after the
first salutation upon entering the room, joined in the conversation; but
he spoke with bitterness of the young Lord; and upon Lady Trelawney’s
attempting to say a few words in his favour, “Hear Sir Everard on this
subject,” said the Count—“only hear what he thinks of him.” “I fear,”
said Sophia, “that all these animadversions will prevent our going
to-morrow, as we proposed, to see the Priory.” “Nothing shall prevent
me,” replied Lady Augusta. “I only beg,” said Mrs. Seymour “that I may
not be of the party, as the tales of horror I have heard concerning the
inhabitants of St. Alvin Priory, from old Lord de Ruthven, at Belfont
Abbey, prevent my having the smallest wish or curiosity to enter its
gates.”

Count Gondimar, now coming towards Calantha, enquired after Zerbellini.
At the request of every one present, he was sent for. Calantha saw a
visible change in Lady Margaret’s countenance, as he entered the room.
“He is the living images”—she murmured, in a low hollow tone—“Of whom?”
said Calantha eagerly.—She seemed agitated and retired. Gondimar in the
evening, took Calantha apart, and said these extraordinary words to her,
“Zerbellini is Lady Margaret and Lord Dartford’s son: treat him according
to his birth; but remember, she would see him a slave sooner than betray
herself: she abhors, yet loves him. Mark her; but never disclose the
secret with which I entrust you.” Astonished, confounded, Calantha now
looked upon the boy with different eyes. Immediately his resemblance to
the family of Delaval struck her—his likeness to herself—his manner so
superior to that of a child in his situation. The long concealed truth,
at once flashed upon her. A thousand times she was tempted to speak upon
the subject. She had not promised to conceal it from Lord Avondale: she
was in the habit of telling him every thing: however she was now for
the first time silent, and there is no more fatal symptom than when an
open communicative disposition grows reserved.


END OF VOL. I.


LONDON: PRINTED BY SCHULZE AND DEAN, 13, POLAND STREET.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLENARVON, VOLUME 1 (OF 3) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


